Type Ia supernovae
St´ephane Blondin,a,b
aAix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CNES, LAM, Marseille, France
bEuropean Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Straße 2, Garching, D-85748, Germany
© 20xx Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Chapter Article tagline: update of previous edition,, reprint..
Glossary
Chandrasekhar mass (MCh) maximum mass for a white dwarf (WD) star; MCh ≈1.4 M⊙for a cold, non-rotating, non-magnetic C-O WD.
Compton scattering in the context of SNe Ia, the scattering of γ-rays by electrons.
Deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT) transition of the combustion mode from a subsonic deflagration to a supersonic detonation.
Double degenerate (DD) scenario progenitor channel for SNe Ia in which a WD merges or collides with another WD.
Electron degeneracy quantum-mechanical effect whereby a confined electron gas will exert a pressure even at zero temperature.
Electron fraction (Ye) ratio of the number of electrons to nucleons (protons + neutrons) in a given chemical mixture.
Forbidden line spectral line resulting from the emission of a photon in an atomic transition with a very low transition probability.
Homologous expansion holds when the velocity of a fluid element is directly proportional to its radius, v(r) ∝r.
Iron-group elements (IGE) elements with atomic numbers in the range Z = 21−28 (i.e. scandium to nickel).
Intermediate-mass elements (IME) elements with atomic numbers in the range Z = 11−20 (i.e. sodium to calcium).
Local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) state of equilibrium between matter and radiation at the local temperature.
Metallicity abundance of all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium.
Nebular phase phase in the SN Ia evolution when the ejecta are transparent and the deposited energy is instantaneously re-emitted.
Nuclear statistical equilibrium (NSE) state of balance in nuclear reactions reached in explosive burning at high temperatures.
Opacity mass extinction coefficient specifying the energy fraction taken from a beam of photons due to absorption and scattering processes.
Optical depth measure of the level of transparency of a medium. Optically thick (thin) refers to an opaque (transparent) medium.
Radiative transfer generic term used to describe the theory of photon-matter interactions as radiation is transported through a medium.
Single degenerate (SD) scenario progenitor channel for SNe Ia in which a WD accretes material from a non-degenerate star.
Supernova (SN) energetic stellar explosion marking the end of the life of some stars.
Thermalization in SNe Ia, process by which γ-ray photons deposit their energy in the ejecta and are reprocessed into thermal radiation.
Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) supernova resulting from the thermonuclear disruption of a carbon-oxygen (C-O) white dwarf (WD) star.
UVOIR luminosity luminosity integrated over the full ultraviolet-optical-infrared range (i.e., excluding escaping high-energy radiation).
White dwarf (WD) star Compact and dense star marking the endpoint of the evolution of stars with initial masses M ≲8 M⊙.
Nomenclature
CE
common envelope
CSM
circumstellar material
DD
double degenerate
DDT
deflagration-to-detonation transition
DTD
delay-time distribution
EC
electron capture
HV
hypervelocity
HVF
high-velocity feature
IGE
iron-group elements
IME
intermediate-mass elements
LTE
local thermodynamic equilibrium
MS
main sequence
NSE
nuclear statistical equilibrium
SD
single degenerate
SN Ia
Type Ia supernova
UVOIR
ultraviolet(UV)-optical-infrared(IR)
WD
white dwarf
Abstract
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) correspond to the thermonuclear explosion of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf (C-O WD) star in a binary
system, triggered by the accretion of material from another star, or the merger/collision with a secondary WD. Their phenomenal
luminosity — several billion times that of the sun — has motivated their use as cosmological distance indicators and led to the
1
arXiv:2411.09740v1  [astro-ph.HE]  14 Nov 2024

2
Type Ia supernovae
discovery of the accelerated expansion of the universe. SNe Ia are also the main producers of iron and hence play a fundamental role
in the chemical evolution of galaxies. While recent observations have confirmed the basic theoretical picture of an exploding C-O
WD star whose luminosity is powered by the radioactive decay of 56Ni, a number of uncertainties remain concerning the nature of
the binary companion and the explosion mechanism. Several lines of evidence point towards the existence of multiple progenitor
channels in order to explain the full range of the observed diversity. A complete physical understanding of these energetic stellar
explosions remains a long-lasting goal of modern astrophysics.
Key points
•
Almost all progenitor scenarios for SNe Ia involve a carbon-oxygen white dwarf star in a binary system, but vary in the nature of the binary companion
(non-degenerate star vs. another WD) and the explosion mechanism or combustion mode.
•
The energy input from the radioactive decay of 56Ni synthesized in the explosion largely determines the luminosity evolution during the first 2–3 years.
The spectroscopic evolution provides a time-dependent scan of the chemically-stratified ejecta, and provides important clues related to its composition and
expansion dynamics.
•
Most SNe Ia form a relatively homogeneous class, albeit with variations in their peak luminosity and spectroscopic properties. There are however events
displaying peculiar light curves and spectra, and this observed diversity could indicate the existence of multiple progenitor channels.
•
While explosion models have different ejecta structures and levels of asymmetry, the predicted observational signatures are often similar and the modeling
uncertainties still too large to make firm associations between individual SNe Ia and specific progenitor scenarios, except in a few rare cases. Long considered
to be the most likely scenario, the explosion of near-Chandrasekhar-mass WDs still faces fundamental challenges and currently favored models involve pairs
of sub-MCh WDs.
•
Future surveys will discover several hundreds of SNe Ia each night, mostly for cosmological studies. However, detailed observations of individual events,
from the pre-explosion phases to several years after, and covering the full electromagnetic spectrum (and soon gravitational waves), remain invaluable to
constrain the mechanism(s) by which WD stars explode.
1 Introduction
Stars with initial masses M ≲8 M⊙evolve to become compact and dense objects known as white dwarfs (WD). Isolated WDs slowly cool
by radiating away their residual thermal energy on timescales that can exceed the present age of the universe. However, a carbon-oxygen
(C-O) WD in a close binary system can accrete mass from a non-WD star, or merge/collide with another WD, resulting in a runaway
thermonuclear fusion reaction chain that can unbind the entire star.
Such stellar explosions, known as Type Ia supernovae (hereafter SNe Ia), are among the most energetic in the universe, with typical
explosion energies of the order of 1044 J. Their luminosity reaches a typical peak value of Lpeak ≈1036 J s−1 (or ∼3 × 109 L⊙), which is
equivalent to a sizable 20-30% of the total luminosity of our own galaxy. For this reason, SNe Ia are visible out to very large distances,
corresponding to a time when the universe was less than one fifth of its present age, only ∼2 Gyr after the Big Bang (Pierel et al., 2024).
Moreover, the realization that the light curves of SNe Ia could be used to accurately calibrate their peak brightness motivated the use of
these events as distance indicators on cosmological scales. This unique property allowed astronomers to use SNe Ia as direct probes of the
dynamical history of the universe, and led to the discovery of its accelerated expansion.
Type Ia SNe are also of great astrophysical interest in their own right. As the main producers of iron in the universe (∼2/3 of the iron
content in our galaxy today; Dwek 2016), SNe Ia are key players in the chemical evolution of galaxies. They inject a significant amount
of kinetic energy and turbulence into the interstellar medium, serving as a trigger for star formation and driving galaxy-scale winds. As
an endpoint of binary stellar evolution for low-mass stars, SNe Ia require an understanding of mass transfer and accretion onto compact
objects, and double-WD systems are predicted to be the dominating source of background gravitational-wave radiation for the future Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA). As is the case for other types of SNe, their long-lived remnants, some of which are visible in our
own galaxy (SN 1006, Tycho’s SN 1572, Kepler’s SN 1604), are thought to be sites for cosmic-ray acceleration. Last, their explosion
mechanism involves all the complexity and richness of turbulent and shock-driven combustion, and is therefore of interest beyond the
astrophysical community. Yet, despite decades of observational and theoretical efforts, the exact nature of the progenitors and explosion
mechanisms of SNe Ia remains an unsolved question to date.
In this chapter, we will first review the basic underlying physical model for SNe Ia and characterize their observational properties
(Section 2). In Section 3 we give an overview of the main progenitor and explosion scenarios invoked to explain the diversity of the SN Ia
class. In Section 4, we discuss paths for future progress in the understanding of the SN Ia phenomenon, both from an observational and
theoretical perspective. Concluding remarks follow in Section 5.
2 Basic physical picture and observational properties
2.1 A carbon-oxygen white dwarf progenitor
Unlike other types of supernovae resulting from the core collapse in massive stars, there are no direct detections of the exploding star in
an SN Ia event, and only limited evidence related to the nature of the binary companion (with firm non detections of a giant companion in
some cases). One therefore has to rely on indirect clues. One such clue is the absence of lines due to hydrogen or helium — the two most

Type Ia supernovae
3
abundant elements in the universe — in their spectra around maximum light. This, combined with the occurrence of SNe Ia in early-type
galaxies dominated by old stellar populations, suggests SNe Ia are associated with an evolved progenitor. Last, the rapid evolution of the
light curve (≲20 days from explosion to peak luminosity, followed by a rapid decline on a similar timescale), provides indirect evidence
for a relatively compact progenitor (further evidence is discussed in Section 2.3.1). Put together, a carbon-oxygen WD star emerges as the
only viable progenitor for SNe Ia.
Carbon-oxygen white dwarfs are the endpoint of the evolution of stars with initial masses 2 ≲M ≲8 M⊙1. Such stars reach core
temperatures for the fusion of helium into carbon and oxygen as they evolve off the main sequence (MS) to become red giant stars. As the
C-O core contracts, the gravitational potential energy released is sufficient to eject the star’s envelope, and its density is such (∼109 kg m−3
on average) that the electrons are degenerate and can be relativistic: It is this degeneracy pressure of the electrons that counteracts the
inward pull of gravity, maintaining the star in hydrostatic equilibrium, before the temperature threshold for carbon fusion is reached in the
core. Under these conditions, a WD star has a maximum mass it can sustain, known as the Chandrasekhar mass (Chandrasekhar, 1931),
whose value depends only on composition, and is approximately MCh ≈1.44 M⊙for a cold, non-rotating, non-magnetic C-O WD star in
the ultra-relativistic limit:
MCh = 0.197
 hc
G
! 3
2
1
(µemH) ≈1.44 M⊙
for
µe = 2,
(1)
where µe is the average molecular weight per electron (µe = 2 for a fully ionized C-O mixture) and mH is the mass of the hydrogen atom
(the other fundamental constants have their usual meaning).
The existence of a maximum mass for WDs could explain why the majority of SNe Ia appear to constitute a relatively homogeneous
class, at least by astronomical standards. Since the majority of C-O WDs are born with an initial mass well below 1 M⊙(Kepler et al.,
2007), this implies that they must accrete mass from a binary companion, or merge with another WD in order to reach ∼1.4 M⊙2. However,
the SN Ia class is significantly more diverse than was originally thought, and currently-favored models for the explosion involve WDs well
below the Chandrasekhar mass (sub-MCh).
2.2 Basic explosion physics
In the classical model of Hoyle and Fowler (1960), as the WD approaches MCh, the core temperature (a few times 108 K) and density
(≳2 × 1012 kg m−3) is sufficient to initiate carbon fusion. Each subsequent increase in the WD mass via accretion leads to a contraction of
the core and an increase in temperature via compressional heating, which in turn results in a rapid increase in the nuclear reaction rate and
a further rise in temperature. In a normal (non-degenerate) star, this feedback process is self-regulated via an increase in the gas thermal
pressure which leads to an expansion of the star and a drop of the core temperature. Under purely degenerate conditions, however, the
pressure is independent of temperature. The above cycle is then self-sustained and the nuclear fusion reactions may undergo a runaway
process.
The increase in temperature is in part compensated via various cooling mechanisms (neutrino emission, thermal conduction, and con-
vection). The WD will eventually expand when the thermal pressure becomes comparable to the electron degeneracy pressure. Convective
motions can initially evacuate the surplus nuclear energy and regulate nuclear reactions3, but it is not efficient enough to prevent the for-
mation of a large temperature gradient and the initiation of a deflagration via thermal conduction. The flame is born, and a thermonuclear
runaway follows. Although this basic physical picture differs somewhat in lower-mass (sub-MCh) WDs, the explosion as a SN Ia always
proceeds via a runaway thermonuclear C-O fusion.
The fusion of ∼1.4 M⊙of an equal mixture of 12C and 16O into iron-group elements (IGEs) releases enough nuclear energy (Enuc ≈
2 × 1044 J)4, which is enough to unbind the WD and accelerate the ejecta to typical expansion velocities of the order of 107 m s−1, as inferred
from the blueshifted absorption in spectral lines:
Enuc ≈−Eb + Ekin,
(2)
where the gravitational binding energy (negative by convention) Eb ≈−5 × 1043 J for a non-rotating MCh WD, and the total kinetic energy
Ekin ≲1.5 × 1044 J.
A few seconds after the onset of the explosion, the expansion follows a self-similar regime referred to as homologous expansion (see
glossary). The expansion is such that adiabatic losses cause the WD to cool very quickly: within one day after explosion, the WD has
expanded from a Earth-sized object (R ≈106 m) to an ejecta whose size is similar to that of the solar system (R ≈1012 m). This would
normally cause the maximum temperature in the ejecta to drop from ∼109 K at a few seconds post explosion (at which point all nuclear
reactions have ceased) to a few 1000 K at one day, and to room temperature (∼300 K) by 10 days in the absence of an additional source of
energy. SNe Ia would thus escape detection were it not for the abundant production of a radioactive isotope of nickel, 56Ni (Colgate and
McKee, 1969). This isotope decays to 56Co via electron capture (EC) and finally to 56Fe via EC or positron decay (β+), emitting γ-rays and
1The lower limit of ∼2 M⊙corresponds to the maximum initial mass of a star that can lead to the formation of a helium WD in a close binary system. For single stars this
lower limit is slightly below 1 M⊙(i.e. our sun will eventually evolve to become a C-O WD).
2There are however models for SNe Ia resulting from isolated WDs, such as the fission-based model of Horowitz and Caplan (2021).
3This is known as the simmering phase and can last for several thousands of years.
4In cgs units this is equal to 2 × 1051 erg, where 1051 erg is sometimes referred to as one Bethe (in honor of Hans Bethe), or one foe (fifty-one ergs).

4
Type Ia supernovae
Fig. 1:
Detection
of
the
847 keV
and
1238 keV (1 keV ≈1.6 × 10−16 J) γ-ray decay
lines of 56Co in INTEGRAL/SPI observations
of the nearby Type Ia SN 2014J (data from
Churazov et al. 2014). This is the only direct
detection to date of γ-rays in a SN Ia event.
600
800
1000
1200
Energy (keV)
0
5 × 10−6
10−5
Flux (photons s−1 cm−2 keV−1)
56Co
847 keV
56Co
1238 keV
SN 2014J (INTEGRAL/SPI)
model
positrons whose energy is deposited in the ejecta on timescales where adiabatic losses (proportional to the differential change in volume,
dV) become less important:
56Ni
Qγ=1.7 MeV
−−−−−−−−−→
t1/2=6.1 days
56Co + γ + νe (EC)
Qγ=3.6 MeV;Qe+ =0.1 MeV
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
t1/2=77.2 days
56Fe + γ + νe (EC)
or
56Fe + e+ + γ + νe (β+)
where Qγ,e+ corresponds to the average energy per decay (1 MeV ≈1.6 × 10−13 J) emitted in γ-rays and positrons, respectively, and t1/2 is
the isotope’s half-life. Only relatively recently has there been direct observational evidence of this decay-powered luminosity in SNe Ia,
through the detection of γ-ray lines from 56Co in the nearest SN Ia observed in the last 50 years, SN 2014J (Fig. 1).
The products of nuclear burning largely depend on the local fuel density. At sufficiently high densities, carbon fusion proceeds all the
way to the iron peak, and nuclear statistical equilibrium (NSE) is established for temperatures ≳5 × 109 K. These conditions ensure that the
nucleosynthesis products do not depend on individual reaction rates, but only depend on the peak temperature, density, and electron fraction
Ye. This latter quantity is set by the initial metallicity of the WD (Ye is lower for higher metallicity) and further modified by electron
captures during the high-density pre-explosion simmering phase and during the explosion itself in MCh events. The final abundances in
regions where NSE is reached are determined during the freeze-out phase, during which free particles reassemble into nuclei on timescales
inversely proportional to the density. In lower-density regions, carbon fusion does not proceed to the iron peak as the silicon-burning process
is incomplete. These are the regions where most of the intermediate-mass elements (IMEs) are synthesized.
The dependence of the nuclear burning products on density implies that the mass of the exploding WD also affects the integrated
yields, as MCh WDs have larger central densities (ρc ≳1012 kg m−3) compared to lower-mass, sub-MCh WDs (ρc ≲1011 kg m−3). As a
result, burning in NSE produces more heavier neutron-rich stable isotopes (e.g. 54Fe and 58Ni) in MCh explosions compared to sub-MCh
explosions for a given initial metallicity. The stable nickel abundance can thus be used in principle to distinguish MCh from sub-MCh
explosions (e.g. Fl¨ors et al., 2020). This also applies to manganese, whose solar abundance can only be explained if a significant fraction of
SNe Ia achieve the high-density burning conditions met in MCh progenitors (Seitenzahl et al., 2013a).
Together with the chemical stratification inferred from the time evolution of SN Ia spectra (see next section), we can already highlight
three basic ingredients for a successful SN Ia model (see box below). The final ingredient of course is to allow for some diversity to match
what is seen in nature. One possible model that satisfies these requirements is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Three basic ingredients for a successful SN Ia model
1.
Explosion energy: of the order of 1044 J to unbind the WD and accelerate the ejecta to characteristic velocities of the order of 107 m s−1. This implies the
WD must be (almost) entirely burnt to release sufficient nuclear energy from fusion of C-O into heavier elements.
Note: some explosion models (e.g. pure deflagrations) result in too low an explosion energy to completely unbind the WD, in which case a bound remnant
is left behind. Such models have been found to be a good candidate for low-luminosity Type Iax events.
2.
Nucleosynthesis: A 56Ni yield in the range 0.1–1.0 M⊙(to power the light curve) + several 0.1 M⊙of IMEs (to match the spectra) + some stable IGE isotopes
(58Ni, 54Fe) + possible traces of unburnt C-O. This requires thermonuclear burning at a large range of densities.
3.
Chemical stratification: stable IGEs + 56Ni near the center and IMEs in the outer layers. This requires a large (exponentially decreasing) density gradient
and weak large-scale mixing during the explosive phase.
Note: the inner ejecta of violent merger models are dominated by the ashes of the incompletely burned secondary WD (O, Ne, Mg), and pure deflagration
models predict significant amounts of unburnt C-O material as a result of large-scale mixing during the explosion.

Type Ia supernovae
5
(a) t = 1 s
0
5
10
15
20
25
Velocity (106 m s−1)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Mass Fraction
Stable IGEs
56Ni
28Si
16O
12C
−1
0
1
2
3
Log10 Density (kg m−3)
Density
(t = 100 s)
(b) t = 100 s
(c) Stable IGEs
(d) 56Ni
(e) 28Si
(f) 16O
(g) 12C
Mass Fraction
Fig. 2: Example of a 3D MCh delayed-detonation model (N100; Seitenzahl et al. 2013b). (a) Density (in g cm−3 = 103 kg m−3; orange color
scale), deflagration plumes (white), and detonation front (blue) at t = 1 s post explosion. (b) Spherically averaged density (dashed line) and
composition profiles for representative isotopes (solid lines) at t = 100 s post explosion. The 2D-projected distribution of each isotope is
shown in the bottom row in panels (c)–(g). The graphics shown in panels (a) and (c)–(g) are reproduced with permission from Seitenzahl et
al. (2013b, their Figs. 2 and 4).
2.3 Luminosity and spectroscopic evolution
We illustrate the evolution of the UVOIR luminosity for a SN Ia model in Fig. 3. As the ejecta expands, the radiation emerges from deeper
ejecta layers5, offering a time-dependent scan of its chemical structure (Fig. 4). In what follows we will discuss four main phases of the
evolution over the first few months post explosion, focusing on normal SN Ia events.
2.3.1 Early evolution
Although 56Ni decay is the main driver for the luminosity evolution, the early luminosity of SNe Ia can be affected by other factors. Most
SN Ia explosion models involve combustion driven by a strong supersonic shock (i.e. a detonation). A predicted observational consequence
is a UV-optical flash of radiation resulting from the shock-heated stellar envelope and lasting ≲1 h, whose luminosity Lshock ≈1032 J s−1
(i.e. four orders of magnitude lower than the peak luminosity; Rabinak et al. 2012) has never been observed6. This early-time flash can in
principle be followed by a dark phase during which 56Ni decay photons are still trapped within the ejecta (estimated to last ∼1 day in the
case of SN 2011fe; Mazzali et al. 2014).
During the first few days that follow, the γ-ray photons emitted in the 56Ni decay chain are completely thermalized by Compton scattering
5At least in a Lagrangian sense, as these deeper layers are expanding at several 106 m s−1.
6However, it is the non-detection of this signature in the nearby Type Ia SN 2011fe that enabled to place a strong constraint on the progenitor radius R⋆≲0.02 R⊙(Bloom
et al., 2012). Also note that an even earlier, shorter-lived signature is expected in X-rays, when the shock breaks out from the stellar envelope.

6
Type Ia supernovae
0
20
40
60
80
Days from UVOIR Maximum
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
36.5
Log10 LUVOIR [J s−1]
56Ni −→56Co
56Co −→56Fe
1
Early (L ≪Ldeposited; Ldeposited = Ldecay)
2
Maximum light (L ∼Ldeposited ∼Ldecay)
3
Post-maximum (L > Ldeposited)
4
Nebular (L = Ldeposited)
γ-ray escape (Ldeposited < Ldecay)
Lγ = Ldecay −Ldeposited
LUVOIR
Ldecay
Ldeposited
0
20
40
60
80
100
Days since Explosion
−18
−16
−14
0.0
0.1
0.2
L/Lmax
ﬂux excess
↓
Early ﬂux excess
(SN 2018oh)
L ∼t2.2
0
20
40
−19
−18
−17
Mabs
2nd IR maximum
(SN 2011fe)
J
H
K
1000
1500
2000
2500
29
30
Log10 LUVOIR
56Co
57Co
55Fe
Very late LUVOIR
(SN 2011fe)
Ldeposited
Fig. 3: Luminosity evolution for a SN Ia model with ∼0.5 M⊙of 56Ni (black solid line; DDC15 model of Blondin et al. 2015). The dashed
and dotted lines show the decay luminosity and the deposited decay power, respectively. The hatched area highlights the increasing γ-ray
escape past maximum light. The insets give examples of early flux excess (left; data from Dimitriadis et al. 2019), the secondary near-IR
maximum (middle; data from Matheson et al. 2012), and the contribution of additional decay chains to the luminosity at very late times
(right; data from Tucker et al. 2022). The axis in each case corresponds to days from maximum light.
off free electrons. Due to the high initial optical depth, this thermal radiation diffuses over a time scale significantly larger than the time
elapsed since the explosion, such that the initial luminosity is very low. As the ejecta expands, the photon escape time becomes less than the
characteristic expansion time, and the luminosity increases. This initial increase is often modeled as a power law in time, L(t) ∝tα, where
α = 2 matches well the early light curve of SN 2011fe (Nugent et al., 2011). However, both theoretical predictions and observations find
significant deviations from α = 2 (Piro and Nakar, 2014; Firth et al., 2015). Moreover, an early flux excess has been observed in several
SNe Ia (left inset in Fig. 3), which could result from the interaction with a binary companion or circumstellar material (CSM), or from the
presence of 56Ni in the outer regions of the ejecta.
The optical spectra at these times are dominated by Doppler-broadened lines of ions from IMEs synthesized in the explosion (e.g. Si ii,
S ii, Ca ii etc.), as well as lines from unburnt carbon (first spectrum in Fig. 4). The characteristic P-Cygni profile shape of these lines displays
a prominent blueshifted absorption that is used to infer the expansion velocity of the corresponding ion. In particular, high-velocity features
(HVFs) are routinely found in lines of Ca ii and Si ii (see insets in Fig. 4) These HVFs are sometimes associated with a spectropolarimetric
signature, indicating an asymmetric distribution of the emitting material (e.g. Kasen et al., 2003).
2.3.2 Peak luminosity (maximum light)
The initial increase in luminosity is counterbalanced by the exponentially decreasing decay power, which causes a maximum in the light
curve. At this time, the UVOIR luminosity is comparable (but not physically equivalent) to the decay power injected in the inner ejecta
layers: this is known as Arnett’s rule (Arnett, 1979), and can be formally expressed as LUVOIR(tpeak) ≈αLdecay(tpeak), with α ≈1. Several
studies have found this rule to be accurate to within 10–20 % (e.g. Blondin et al., 2013). The maximum-light spectra are still dominated by
lines from IMEs, and early-time signatures of unburnt carbon have usually disappeared by then.

Type Ia supernovae
7
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
Rest Wavelength (˚A)
Scaled Flux (Fλ) + Constant
Si ii
Ca ii
Velocity (106 m s−1)
Ca ii
S ii Si ii
[Co iii]
∆t(d) =
−16
+0
+21
+73
1
2
3
4
SN 2011fe
−20
0
C ii
Si ii
−20
0
Ca ii
Fig. 4: Spectroscopic evolution of the Type Ia
SN 2011fe over the first ∼100 days post explo-
sion (data from Pereira et al. 2013).
The right
labels give the spectral phase in days from max-
imum light, and the circled numbers on the left
correspond to the phases highlighted in Fig. 3. The
tickmarks on the Y-axis give the zero-flux level of
each spectrum. A few key spectroscopic features
are highlighted in gray. The insets show exam-
ples of high-velocity features at early times in the
Si ii 6355 Å and Ca ii near-IR triplet line profiles.
A small absorption due to C ii 6580 Å (i.e. unburnt
carbon) can also be seen in the left inset.
2.3.3 Post-maximum evolution
Two notable phenomena occur after the peak in luminosity. First, the rate of energy actually deposited in the ejecta (dotted curve in Fig. 3)
becomes an increasingly smaller fraction of the radioactive decay power (mainly from 56Co decay at this time; dashed curve). This is due
to the increase in the mean free path of γ-ray photons, an ever-increasing fraction of which manages to escape directly from the ejecta
without interaction7. Second, the luminosity exceeds the energy deposition rate during ∼30 days, which corresponds to the time needed to
radiate the energy stored at previous times. Around 40 days post explosion, we even observe a slight inflection in the light curve: radiative
processes lead to a cooling of the ejecta, including emission by forbidden lines (such as [Co iii] 5888 Å; Dessart et al. 2014). This releases
a significant amount of radiative energy (∆Erad ≈aR∆T 4∆V, where aR is the radiation constant), of the order of 1035 J s−1. To this inflection
in the evolution of the UVOIR luminosity corresponds a second peak in the light curves in the near-IR bands (JHK; see middle inset in
Fig. 3).
More luminous SNe Ia decline more slowly past maximum light in several photometric bands (i.e. their light curves are broader)
compared to lower-luminosity events: this is known as the width-luminosity relation (Phillips, 1993). It results from the faster evolution to
redder colors in lower-luminosity events around maximum light, which causes a more rapid decline in the blue optical bands (Kasen and
Woosley, 2007).
2.3.4 Late-time evolution: the nebular phase
Finally, from ∼50 days after the explosion onward, the ejecta becomes almost completely transparent, and the luminosity equals (and is
physically equivalent to) the rate of decay energy deposition in the ejecta, an increasing fraction of which comes from positrons from 56Co
decay8: this is known as the nebular phase. One can further show that the time-weighted integral of the UVOIR luminosity is equal to that
of the deposited decay power by this time (Katz et al., 2013), a property that can be used to infer the 56Ni mass from observations without
relying on the less accurate Arnett rule:
Z t
0
t′LUVOIR(t′) dt′ =
Z t
0
t′Ldep(t′) dt′
for t ≫tpeak.
(3)
The nebular spectra now probe the innermost ejecta and reflect the iron-group dominated composition there (Fig. 5). The most prominent
lines are due to forbidden transitions of Fe and Co, with some evidence of weak lines from nickel. The overlying IMEs, visible at earlier
phases, also contribute to the cooling. Since all of the 56Ni synthesized in the explosion has long decayed by this time, all the nickel left in
the ejecta is made up of stable isotopes (mainly 58Ni). As noted in Section 2.2, the abundance of these stable isotopes can in principle be
7The characteristic γ-ray escape time scales with the square root of the total ejecta mass (Jeffery, 1999), and has led several authors to conclude that a significant fraction
of SNe Ia result from sub-MCh progenitors (Stritzinger et al., 2006; Scalzo et al., 2014; Wygoda et al., 2019).
8Other radioactive decay chains become important at even later times, such as 57Co (t1/2 ≈272 days) and 55Fe (t1/2 ≈1000 days), both confirmed observationally in the
nearby SN 2011fe (see right inset in Fig. 3).

8
Type Ia supernovae
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2 2.4
Rest Wavelength [µm]
Scaled Fν + oﬀset
[Fe iii]
[Co iii]
[Ar iii]
[Fe ii]
[Ca ii]
[Ni ii]
[Ni iii]
Ca ii
[S iii]
[Co ii]
[Fe ii]
[Co ii]
[Fe ii]
[Ni ii]
[Fe iii]
[O i]
2021aefx
texp =
270 d
SALT+RSS
JWST+NIRSpec
2022pul
texp =
338 d
MMT+
Binospec
Keck+NIRES
MERGER
model
[O i] 6300 ˚
A
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 13 14
Scaled Fν
5–14 µm
(JWST
+MIRI)
[Ar ii]
[Ni iii]
[Ni iv]
[Ar iii]
[S iv]
[Ni iii]
[Co iii]
[Ne ii]
−10 0
10
[Ca iv]
3.21 µm
−10 0
10
[Ar iii]
8.99 µm
-10
0
10
[Co iii]
11.89 µm
-10
0
10
[Ne ii]
12.81 µm
Velocity [106 m s−1]
Fig. 5: Left panel: Nebular spectra of SN 2021aefx at 270 days post explosion (top) and of SN 2022pul at 338 days post explosion (bottom).
The SN 2022pul spectrum is compared to a violent merger model, which correctly predicts a narrow [O i] 6300 Å doublet (solid line; see
also left inset). Right panels: Comparison of mid-IR line profiles in both spectra, normalized to their peak intensity. Lines in this range
are more isolated and reveal variations in morphology (boxy vs. peaked), as well as kinematic offsets of several 106 m s−1. The mid-IR
spectrum of SN 2022pul shows a prominent line due to [Ne ii] 12.81 µm, which is characteristic of the violent merger of two WDs (Kwok
et al., 2024).
used to constrain the mass of the exploding WD.
The forbidden lines in nebular SN Ia spectra are optically thin and hence only visible in emission. The morphology of their profiles can
be used to constrain the chemical distribution and ejecta geometry (right panels in Fig. 5). For instance, several SNe Ia display velocity
shifts in their nebular line profiles (i.e. the lines are not centered on their rest wavelength), that could result from an off-center explosion
(Maeda et al., 2010). Other events display a horn-like double-peaked morphology, consistent with predictions of WD-WD collision models
(Dong et al., 2015). More recently, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has paved the way for systematic studies of SNe Ia in the
mid-IR spectral range. Observations of one event, SN 2022pul, have revealed the presence of a strong line due to [Ne ii] 12.8 µm, presented
as a smoking-gun signature of the violent merger of two WDs (see MERGER model spectrum in Fig. 5).
2.4 Observational diversity
The basic physical picture outlined above applies to the bulk of the SN Ia population, and can accommodate part of the observed diversity
(in rise time, peak luminosity, post-maximum decline rate, color evolution, and spectroscopic properties; see Fig. 6), some of which could
be simply due to viewing-angle effects in an asymmetric explosion. At the high-luminosity end are the 91T-like SNe Ia that resemble the
prototypical SN 1991T, characterized by a higher ionization and abundance of IGEs in the outer layers, and sometimes associated with
CSM interaction (see Phillips et al. 2024 for a recent review). At the low-luminosity end, 91bg-like SNe Ia (resembling the prototypical
SN 1991bg) are characterized by a deep Ti ii/Cr ii absorption trough in their early-time optical spectra, redder colors at early times, and
the absence of a secondary maximum in their near-IR light curves. Some authors have explained this diversity as a continuous sequence in
temperature/ionization related to the 56Ni yield (e.g. Nugent et al., 1995).
There are however peculiar events that possibly constitute distinct sub-classes, and these are sometimes collectively referred to as
“thermonuclear supernovae” or “white dwarf supernovae” (see Taubenberger 2017 for a review). Of these, we highlight super-luminous
SNe Ia (e.g. SN 2009dc) sometimes associated with the explosion of rapidly-rotating super-massive WDs (Yoon and Langer, 2005)9, which
could also form via the merger of a sub-MCh WD and the C-O core of an asymptotic giant branch star inside a common envelope (core-
degenerate scenario; Kashi and Soker 2011); SNe Ia that display strong narrow hydrogen lines resulting from interaction with a dense CSM
(Ia-CSM; e.g. SN 2002ic); low-luminosity events with low ejecta velocities that resemble SN 2002cx (referred to as Type Iax SNe; see Jha
2017 for a review); and low-luminosity events similar to SN 2002es with a slow post-maximum decline in luminosity (i.e. contrary to the
width-luminosity relation). Example light curves and maximum-light spectra of these events are shown in Fig. 6.
9Often referred to as “super-MCh” SNe Ia since their mass exceeds ∼1.4 M⊙, although this canonical value only applies to a non-rotating WD, which is not the case here.

Type Ia supernovae
9
−20
0
20
40
60
Days since Maximum
−20
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
Absolute V -band Magnitude
2009dc
2002ic
1991T
2011fe
2002es
1991bg
2002cx
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
Rest Wavelength (˚A)
Scaled Flux (Fλ) + Constant
SN 2009dc
(Ia-Super)
SN 2002ic
(Ia-CSM)
SN 1991T
(Ia-91T)
SN 2011fe
(Ia-norm)
SN 2002es
(Ia-02es)
SN 1991bg
(Ia-91bg)
SN 2002cx
(Ia-02cx)
C ii
Hα
Fe iii
Fe iii
Si ii
Cr ii
Ti ii
Fe iii
Fe iii
Maximum-light spectra
Fig. 6: The observational diversity of SNe Ia, both in terms of their peak luminosity and light-curve shape (here in the V band; left) and their
spectroscopic properties (here around maximum light; right). Data sources: SN 2009dc (Taubenberger et al., 2011), SN 2002ic (Hamuy
et al., 2003; Wood-Vasey et al., 2004), SN 1991T (Phillips et al., 1992; Lira et al., 1998; Altavilla et al., 2004), SN 2011fe (Richmond
and Smith, 2012; Pereira et al., 2013), SN 2002es (Hicken et al., 2009; Ganeshalingam et al., 2012), SN 1991bg (Filippenko et al., 1992;
Leibundgut et al., 1993; Turatto et al., 1996), SN 2002cx (Li et al., 2003).
2.5 Modeling challenges
Before presenting possible progenitor scenarios and explosion mechanisms in Section 3, we first comment on some of the theoretical and
numerical challenges associated with modeling SNe Ia.
2.5.1 Thermonuclear burning fronts
The first of these concerns modeling thermonuclear burning fronts (see R¨opke 2017 for a review). Combustion fronts can propagate via two
modes: subsonic deflagrations (which propagate via thermal conduction and are accelerated via interaction with turbulence) and supersonic
detonations (which propagate via a strong shock). A deflagration can also transition to a detonation via a deflagration-to-detonation transi-
tion (DDT), relevant for MCh SN Ia models (see Section 3.1), but which poses a major challenge even in terrestrial combustion experiments
(Poludnenko et al., 2019).
Because of the steep dependence of nuclear reaction rates on temperature, combustion fronts are confined to a thin layer that can be
well below 10−3 m, which is more than nine orders of magnitude smaller than the WD radius (≳106 m). The modeling of deflagrations
requires knowledge of microphysical processes that cannot be resolved in multi-dimensional simulations, even with advanced numerical
methods such as adaptive mesh refinement. While such knowledge is not necessary when modeling detonation fronts, these display a multi-
dimensional cellular pattern whose inner structure is also left unresolved. In both cases, the combustion front must either be artificially
broadened to match the resolution of the numerical grid, or treated as a sharp discontinuity (level-set approach; as seen in Fig. 2) whose
propagation speed is determined a priori as opposed to computed self consistently.
2.5.2 Explosive nucleosynthesis
Computing accurate yields in SN Ia explosion simulations is also faced with a resolution problem, as the reaction length scales vary by
several orders of magnitude (see Seitenzahl and Townsley 2017 for a review). The number of isotopes involved in the nuclear reactions
relevant to carbon burning is also prohibitively large to be included in multi-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations of the explosion
(200–300 isotopes in typical SN Ia reaction networks). The strategy is then to consider smaller networks coupled to the hydrodynamics that
match the nuclear energy release – which serves for instance to propagate the detonation front – predicted using larger networks, and then
compute the accurate nucleosynthesis as part of a post-processing step (using Lagrangian tracer particles; e.g. Travaglio et al. 2004).

10
Type Ia supernovae
2.5.3 Radiative transfer
To predict the observable signatures from a given explosion model, one needs to model the interaction of the radiation with the rapidly-
expanding ejecta, i.e. solve a radiative-transfer (RT) problem. There are various approaches to this, from solving the RT equation along
rays to following photon packets in a Monte Carlo experiment. Most RT simulations are initiated at ∼1 day after the explosion, at which
point the ejecta are in homologous expansion and one can choose to ignore the hydrodynamical part of the problem. Up until the nebular
phase, however, time-dependent effects should be taken into account since there is a delay between the injection of energy from the 56Ni
decay chain and the resulting escape of thermalized photons from the SN ejecta. Non-local energy deposition by γ-rays and non-thermal
effects resulting from fast electrons generated in Compton scatterings of these γ-rays also need to be treated self consistently.
Furthermore, RT simulations in the context of SNe Ia are complicated due to the nature of the opacity (e.g. Pinto and Eastman, 2000).
The dominance of atomic lines (bound-bound transitions), which both absorb and scatter incoming photons, has the effect of decoupling the
radiation field from the local thermodynamical conditions of the gas (temperature and electron density). One then needs to solve numerous
rate equations to compute the populations ni (number density, m−3) of each atomic level i for each ion considered in the solution. The IGEs
that dominate the composition of SN Ia ejecta have several thousands of individual levels and millions of bound-bound transitions between
them. Solving the complete set of rate equations comes at a huge computational cost, even in 1D, which becomes prohibitively large in 3D.
One strategy is to treat the entire problem assuming spherical symmetry (1D), but this overlooks the inversion of the chemical stratifica-
tion between the stable IGEs and 56Ni-rich layers as predicted in 3D models of the explosion (for MCh DDT models). Another approach is to
start with spherical averages of a 3D explosion model, but this then artificially mixes together regions burnt at a wide range of densities and
hence leads to chemical inconsistencies (e.g. Pakmor et al., 2024). Last, treating the entire problem (hydrodynamics + RT) in 3D requires
the sacrifice of physical consistency (e.g. in the treatment of ionization) to save computational costs. Even in 1D, starting with the same
initial ejecta model does not guarantee that different codes will yield the same results (Blondin et al., 2022a).
3 Progenitor scenarios and explosion mechanisms
There are several viable progenitor scenarios for SNe Ia, with specific explosion mechanisms associated with each. For a long time,
the explosion of a near-MCh WD was considered the most likely candidate, at least from a theoretical standpoint, but recent years have
witnessed a regained interest in models involving sub-MCh WD pairs, in particular violent mergers and double-detonation models. Different
models, however, can yield similar observable signatures, as the outcome of the explosion in terms of ejecta dynamics and composition are
sometimes weakly sensitive to the initial state of the WD or the details of the nuclear burning10. That said, a few observed SNe Ia have
displayed smoking-gun signatures associated with a particular scenario. In what follows we review the main explosion models considered
by the community today. The different progenitor channels associated with each model are schematically illustrated in Fig. 7, and Table 1
summarizes some of their most salient features.
3.1 The classical Chandrasekhar-mass model, or single-degenerate (SD) scenario
Long considered the standard model for SNe Ia, this model involves a WD that accretes material from a non-degenerate binary companion
until its mass approaches MCh. Here, the combustion must first proceed as a deflagration and then transition to a detonation via the DDT
mechanism (Khokhlov, 1991). Indeed, pure deflagrations result in weak explosions that sometimes fail to completely unbind the WD (such
models have been proposed for Type Iax events), while pure detonations are ruled out as they burn the entire WD to IGEs, with too little
IMEs needed to reproduce the early-time spectra11. Various flavors of this delayed-detonation model exist, such as gravitationally-confined
detonations or pulsationally-reversed detonations. The key requirement is that the WD is pre-expanded during the deflagration phase before
the detonation burns the remainder of the WD at lower densities, producing IMEs in sufficient amounts.
The advantages of the SD scenario is that it naturally provides the correct conditions to ignite carbon fusion in the WD core, in addition
to a physical basis (namely the MCh limit) for the observed homogeneity of a large fraction of the SN Ia sample. Some nucleosynthesis
arguments (such as the abundance of manganese in the solar neighborhood; see Section 2.2) point towards the need for a significant
contribution of MCh progenitors to the SN Ia population. Chandrasekhar-mass delayed-detonation models have also been successful at
reproducing the observed light curves and spectra of normal SNe Ia, although the range in 56Ni yield needed to reproduce the observed
range in peak luminosity requires a somewhat artificial tuning of the density at which the DDT occurs.
But this long favored model has several essential shortcomings. Starting with stellar evolution, growing a WD via accretion to MCh
requires a fine tuning of the accretion rate to values of the order of 10−7 M⊙yr−1 (Nomoto et al., 1984), and the predicted rates for the
SD channel are too low by at least one order of magnitude compared to the observed SN Ia rate – although these results are subject to
uncertainties related for instance to the common envelope (CE) phase of the evolution, critical to forming close interacting binary systems.
The SD scenario is also difficult to reconcile with the long delay times of a few Gyrs between WD formation and explosion as inferred from
delay-time distributions (DTD; see Maoz et al. 2014). Last, some nucleosynthesis constraints instead impose an upper limit on the fraction
of SNe Ia resulting from MCh progenitors (e.g. Bravo et al., 2022).
The lack of a direct and unambiguous detection of the companion, even in the favorable case of the nearby SN 2011fe (e.g. Tucker and
Shappee, 2024), as well as in SN Ia remnants in our galaxy or in the Large Magellanic Cloud (e.g. Kerzendorf et al., 2018), is problematic.
10P. Hoeflich coined the term “stellar amnesia” to describe this lack of sensitivity to the initial conditions (e.g. H¨oflich, 2006).
11Pure detonations of sub-MCh WDs however do produce the correct mix of IGEs and IMEs since their initial density is lower compared to MCh WDs.

Type Ia supernovae
11
MS+MS
Giant + MS
CE phase
C-O WD + star
H/He transfer
M ~ MCh
M < MCh
Deflagration*
or DDT
Double 
detonation
Slow
merger
Violent
merger
Collision
D6
CE phase
C-O WD + Giant
(after initial phase 
of mass transfer)
H/He star
C-O core 
or WD
He shell 
(     detonation)
Common 
Envelope (CE)
SN Ia
C-O WD + WD
(both M < MCh)
or
+ stellar companion
(possibly hypervelocity, HV)
+ HV WD
no surviving 
companion
C-O transfer
C-O/He transfer
* + low-mass C-O core 
     (weak deflagration)
or
NS
Neutron
star (NS)
No transfer
Fig. 7: Schematic view of the six SN Ia progenitor channels presented in this chapter, starting with a main sequence (MS) binary system
and proceeding through different evolutionary stages and final outcomes (each separated by a dashed vertical line).
Indirect detections include interaction of the rapidly-expanding ejecta with the companion12, leading to an early-time signature at UV-
blue wavelengths (Kasen, 2010). Such signatures have been seen in several SNe Ia but none have been unambiguously associated with
interaction with a companion. Likewise, H-rich material stripped from the companion as it is overtaken by the SN ejecta should result in
narrow hydrogen lines in the nebular spectra, with only one firm detection so far (Prieto et al., 2020). Pre-SN mass loss via winds from the
companion, in addition to left-over material from the accretion phase, should lead to a complex CSM with which the SN ejecta interacts,
resulting in radio signatures only detected in one event so far (SN 2020eyj; Kool et al. 2023). This event also displayed spectroscopic
signatures of interaction with a He-rich CSM from a helium star companion. An X-ray signature is also expected in the SD scenario, either
during the pre-explosion phase as a supersoft X-ray source, or resulting from CSM interaction. This has only been detected in one event
at nebular times (Bochenek et al., 2018), and no detection has been reported even in the case of Ia-CSM events (Dwarkadas, 2024). The
pre-SN wind is also expected to carve out a low-density cavity in the surrounding CSM, which has not been convincingly detected in SN Ia
remnants; these instead appear to be expanding into a uniform medium (Badenes et al., 2007).
3.2 Double-detonations in sub-Chandrasekhar-mass WDs with stable mass transfer
Pure detonations of sub-MCh WDs provide a viable alternative to the aforementioned MCh SD scenario. One immediate advantage is the
abundance of lower-mass WDs which could account for the observed SN Ia rate. Second, the range of typical WD masses considered in such
models (0.8–1.1 M⊙) results in a range of density profiles and hence a range in 56Ni yields which naturally explains the observed diversity
in peak luminosity. In particular, the rapidly-evolving light curves of low-luminosity 91bg-like SNe Ia seemingly require a sub-MCh ejecta
(Blondin et al., 2017).
12Except in the “spin up-spin down” scenario, where the WD must first rid itself of the excess angular momentum gained via accretion before exploding, during which
time the companion continues to shed its envelope, shrinking considerably in size (Justham, 2011).

12
Type Ia supernovae
Table 1: Basic characteristics of progenitor scenarios for SNe Ia.
Scenario
Combustion
MWD
Companion
Surviving
Early
Nebular
Mode a
(primary)
Companion b
Interaction
Lines c
Single WD progenitor systems
Single degenerate
delayed-DET
∼MCh
MS/Giant
or He star
HV star
or slow stripped Giant d
(+ low-mass C/O core e)
companion
and CSM
narrow Hα
+ velocity shifts f
DEF
narrow [O i]
Double detonation
DET
sub-MCh
He star
HV star
companion
and CSM
· · ·
(He+C)
Double WD progenitor systems
Slow WD merger
DET
sub-MCh
sub-MCh WD
none
C-O envelope
· · ·
(Double-degenerate)
or ∼MCh
or NS g
Violent WD merger
DET
sub-MCh
sub-MCh WD
none
· · ·
[Ne ii]
+ narrow [O i]
D6 (one explosion)
DET
(He+C)
sub-MCh
sub-MCh WD
(C-O or He)
HV WD
· · ·
velocity shifts
D6 (two explosions)
none
· · ·
velocity shifts
+ double-peaked
WD collision
DET
sub-MCh
sub-MCh WD
none
· · ·
double-peaked
or HV 3rd star h
a delayed-DET = delayed detonation; DEF = pure deflagration; DET = pure detonation.
b HV = hypervelocity.
c we only report on peculiar spectroscopic signatures.
d a giant donor would survive the explosion partially stripped of its outer H/He-rich envelope, and be ejected from the system at a
lower velocity compared to less massive companions.
e for weak deflagrations that fail to completely unbind the WD.
f nebular line shifts are expected in an explosion ignited off-center.
g such slow mergers can lead to an accretion-induced collapse to a neutron star and hence no SN Ia event.
h for triple systems consisting of a double-WD binary and a third low-mass star.
In order to explode, sub-MCh WDs require the formation of a helium shell around the C-O core, via accretion of H-rich material (which
burns to helium on the WD surface) or He-rich material from a donor star. Here we consider cases where the mass transfer is stable. This
helium shell must somehow detonate near its base, driving a powerful shock wave into the WD, leading to a secondary detonation of the
C-O core. Initial models considered a relatively massive helium shell (≲0.2 M⊙), whose detonation produces copious amounts of 56Ni and
other IGEs that are in conflict with the early-time spectra. Subsequent theoretical investigations showed that less massive helium shells (a
few 0.01 M⊙) were able to detonate and produce a successful secondary explosion while leaving little IGE-rich material in the outer ejecta
(e.g. Fink et al., 2010).
There is a common misconception that the explosion of sub-MCh WDs produces no stable isotopes of nickel. Despite the lower densities
involved in the burning (≲1011 kg m−3), stable 58Ni is produced in NSE in sub-MCh explosions, albeit at a lower abundance compared to
MCh models at a given metallicity. The strength of the nebular forbidden lines of nickel is highly sensitive to the ionization state of the Ni-
rich layers, such that abundance determinations are uncertain (Blondin et al., 2022b). Moreover, there is no unambiguous correspondence
between the stable nickel mass and the mass of the exploding WD, since some MCh models (e.g. gravitationally-confined detonations)
predict similar stable IGE yields as sub-MCh models. Nonetheless, Fl¨ors et al. (2020) attempted to estimate the stable Ni/Fe ratio from
late-time spectra, and concluded that the majority of the SNe Ia in their sample were not only consistent with sub-MCh explosions, but also
inconsistent with the predictions from standard MCh DDT models.
3.3 Slow mergers or the classical double-degenerate (DD) scenario
In this scenario, two unequal-mass sub-MCh C-O WDs in a close binary system (whose total mass exceeds MCh) slowly spiral in via emission
of gravitational waves (Webbink, 1984; Iben and Tutukov, 1984). The less massive (secondary) WD is disrupted and forms a hot envelope
surrounded by an accretion disk around the more massive (primary) WD. The rapid accretion of C-O-rich material onto the primary WD
ensures an efficient increase in mass (possibly approaching MCh), at which point the conditions for carbon ignition are reached in the core —
as in the classical MCh scenario. The explosion will thus occur within a massive C-O envelope, resulting in an interaction at early times that

Type Ia supernovae
13
could explain some super-luminous SNe Ia (e.g. Taubenberger et al., 2013). However, the spectroscopic properties of such an interaction
have not yet been thoroughly investigated.
This scenario naturally explains the absence of hydrogen and helium lines in the spectra of SNe Ia, as well as the lack of any firm
detection of a non-degenerate companion star13. Moreover, the loss of angular momentum via gravitational-wave radiation results in a
power-law DTD ∝t−1 consistent with observations (Maoz and Mannucci, 2012). The predicted rates of DD systems are also closer to the
observed SN Ia rate, although it has been argued that mergers of sub-MCh WDs whose combined mass is less than MCh must also contribute
(van Kerkwijk et al., 2010). However, surveys devoted to the discovery of close double-WD systems have only discovered a handful of
candidates that will merge within a Hubble time, and only two systems with a combined mass either consistent with MCh (Geier et al., 2007)
or slightly exceeding MCh (Pelisoli et al., 2021).
One major drawback of the DD scenario is a result of the predicted high accretion rate onto the primary WD. It is thought to lead to an
off-center ignition of carbon and the formation of a high-mass O-Ne WD, with a subsequent accretion-induced collapse to a neutron star
and hence no SN Ia event (e.g. Shen et al., 2012).
3.4 Violent mergers
In contrast to the slow WD mergers discussed above, carbon ignition in violent WD mergers occurs in the immediate precursor phase
or during the merger event itself. The first simulations showed that merging two near-equal-mass ∼0.9 M⊙WDs would lead to violent
accretion of the less massive WD onto the primary, and a hotspot would form at the interface between the direct accretion stream and
the C-O core of the more massive WD, possibly resulting in carbon ignition and a thermonuclear runaway (Pakmor et al., 2010). Since
the exploding WD is significantly sub-MCh, the amount of 56Ni synthesized in the explosion is rather small and only consistent with low-
luminosity SNe Ia. However, the larger ejecta mass results in longer diffusion timescales, hence the predicted light curves are broader than
for classical 91bg-like events, although possibly compatible with peculiar low-luminosity events such as SN 2010lp (Kromer et al., 2013).
The secondary WD is only partially burned shortly after the explosion, and its oxygen-dominated ejecta expands inside that of the primary
WD, which could explain the presence of narrow [O i] lines in nebular spectra of these sub-luminous events (Kromer et al., 2016).
Later studies considered unequal-mass WD systems with a more massive primary WD (∼1.1 M⊙), resulting in 56Ni yields compatible
with a normal SN Ia event (Pakmor et al., 2012). As in the low-luminosity case above, the inner ejecta is dominated by the ashes of the
partially-burnt secondary WD, which consist mostly of oxygen but also some neon. A strong forbidden line in the mid-IR range due to
[Ne ii] 12.8 µm was indeed predicted to emerge in nebular spectra of this violent merger model (Blondin et al., 2023), which was detected
soon after and for the first time in a JWST spectrum of the Type Ia SN 2022pul (Kwok et al. 2024; see Fig. 5).
While a promising scenario for SNe Ia, it is unclear whether the hotspot resulting from the direct-impact accretion stream actually leads
to a detonation, although longer-term spiral instabilities may provide the necessary ignition conditions (Kashyap et al., 2015). Also, the
predicted level of asymmetry in the ejecta can be fairly high, in contradiction with the low polarization levels commonly observed in SNe Ia
(Bulla et al., 2016) and with the spherical morphology of SN Ia remnants.
3.5 Double detonations in double-WD systems with dynamically unstable mass transfer (D6 scenario)
The initial configuration for this explosion scenario is similar to that for the violent mergers discussed above, and both result from a
dynamically unstable mass transfer. However, the explosion here is triggered by the detonation of a thin helium layer on the primary WD
(either present initially or accreted from the secondary WD) – as opposed to direct carbon ignition in its core. This initial detonation then
leads to a secondary detonation of the C-O core, as in the classical double-detonation scenario (Section 3.2). Such explosions are referred
to as helium-ignited violent mergers (Pakmor et al., 2013) or more poetically as dynamically driven double degenerate double detonations
(D6; Shen et al. 2018b).
One important observational consequence compared to violent mergers is that the secondary WD can survive the explosion and be
ejected from the system as a hypervelocity (HV) WD with peculiar chemical composition. Several HV WDs have in fact been detected
by the Gaia satellite, confirming the viability of this scenario, although in too low numbers to explain the majority of SNe Ia (Shen et al.,
2018a). However, if a thin helium shell is also present on the secondary WD, the impact of the rapidly-expanding ejecta from the primary
can lead to its detonation and a subsequent double-detonation explosion of the secondary, i.e. a quadruple-detonation event (Pakmor et al.,
2022). The predicted delay of a few seconds between both explosions leads to the expansion of the secondary WD’s ejecta inside that of
the primary, leading to possible late-time signatures of asymmetries and peculiar chemical profiles that could help distinguish quadruple
detonations from cases where the secondary WD survives the explosion.
3.6 Collisions
There is a non-negligible probability for two WDs in dense stellar environments (such as globular clusters or galactic nuclei) to collide
head-on with one another (Benz et al., 1989). Such collisions are however expected to be rare, even when taking into account Kozai-Lidov
resonances induced by a third low-mass star orbiting the inner WD binary (e.g. Katz and Dong, 2012). Numerical simulations of head-on
collisions of WD pairs with varying masses and impact parameters have been able to produce successful explosions with 56Ni yields that
match the observed range in peak luminosity. A bimodal 56Ni distribution is often expected in such models, resulting in double-peaked
emission lines of cobalt and iron at late times that have been detected in a few nebular SN Ia spectra (Dong et al., 2015). It is still unclear
13This statement also applies to all the other double-WD scenarios discussed in the following sections (3.4–3.6).

14
Type Ia supernovae
however whether these features are a smoking-gun signature for this scenario, as double-peaked profiles could also result from quadruple
detonations in the D6 scenario discussed above.
4 Ongoing and future developments
Here we mention a few ongoing and future efforts to better understand the nature of SNe Ia, both from observational and theoreti-
cal/modeling perspectives.
4.1 Observations
There already exists a plethora of high-quality photometric and spectroscopic data for SNe Ia collected over several decades. That said,
more recent high-cadence surveys – such as the Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System (ATLAS; Tonry et al. 2018) or the Zwicky
Transient Facility (ZTF; Bellm et al. 2019) – have enabled the systematic discovery of SNe Ia within a few days from the explosion. Studies
of the earliest phases of the evolution places important constraints on the presence of a (massive) binary companion or CSM, or on the
presence of 56Ni in the outer ejecta (see Section 2.3.1).
The upcoming Vera Rubin Observatory, with its ten-year Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST), will discover and monitor over a
million SNe Ia starting in 2025. The observing cadence, however, will result in relatively sparsely-sampled light curves, and spectroscopic
follow-up is not included in the survey design and will be limited to a small fraction of the total sample. Rubin/LSST will also discover over
a hundred strongly-lensed SNe Ia out to redshifts z ≲1 that are strongly lensed by a foreground galaxy (Arendse et al., 2024), producing
multiple images of the SN that appear at different times. By detecting the first appearing SN image, one can use the predicted time delays
between the multiple images to catch the SN right at the moment of its next appearance, and hence access the first hours/days of its evolution
(Suyu et al., 2020). Moreover, the rest-frame UV radiation of these high-redshift events can be observed with ground-based facilities at
optical wavelengths, providing complementary diagnostics to high-cadence surveys targeting nearby events.
The recent launch of JWST has enabled the systematic study of SNe Ia at mid-IR wavelengths – such data only existed for a handful of
events before then. The first late-time spectra of SNe Ia obtained with JWST revealed for the first time the 2.5–5 µm range for these events,
as well as the detection of the [Ne ii] 12.8 µm line in one event, as predicted by violent merger models (see Fig. 5). The Euclid satellite,
although not designed for transient surveys, could be used to complement the high-redshift SN Ia sample of Rubin/LSST for cosmological
studies at near-IR wavelengths (Bailey et al., 2023). The future Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (NGRST), on the other hand, will
carry out a dedicated near-IR survey of a few thousand SNe Ia (Hounsell et al., 2018)14.
At higher frequencies, the X-ray satellite XRISM (launched in September 2023), and hopefully succeeded by ESA’s NewAthena mission
in the late 2030’s, will carry out spatially-resolved spectroscopic studies of SN Ia remnants, thereby directly constraining the explosion
energetics and ejecta chemical stratification. In the γ-ray regime, the Compton Spectrometer and Imager (COSI; planned launch in 2025)
should be able to detect energetic photons resulting from the 44Ti decay chain, whose abundance can be used to discriminate between
different SN Ia explosion mechanisms (e.g. Kosakowski et al., 2023).
Last, the revolution wrought by the direct detection of gravitational waves has opened up a new channel for studying astronomical
events, including SNe Ia. Double WD systems are expected to largely dominate over all other compact binaries detected by LISA in our
galaxy (Amaro-Seoane et al., 2023), with an expected ≳2000 WD+WD systems with a primary mass exceeding 0.8 M⊙that could explode
as SNe Ia (Korol et al. 2024 and private communication). LISA will also be able to detect WD+black hole binaries and test the scenario in
which a WD is tidally stripped by an intermediate-mass (< 105 M⊙) black hole (Rosswog et al., 2009).
4.2 Theory and Modeling
On the theoretical and modeling fronts, ongoing efforts are focused on stellar evolution, the hydrodynamics of the explosion and its coupling
to the nucleosynthesis, and the radiative-transfer post-processing.
Concerning stellar evolution, 3D modeling of the common envelope phase of evolution is currently being undertaken to better understand
how close binary systems can form. More accurate rate estimates for the MCh channel require a better understanding of accretion processes
onto WDs that can result in a near-MCh progenitor, as well as of the pre-explosion simmering phase.
Numerical modeling of the explosion still suffers from insufficient resolution to properly model the combustion fronts in SNe Ia, although
recent simulations have been able to resolve the detonation of a thin helium layer atop a C-O WD, with a grid-cell resolution of a few tens
of meters only (F. R¨opke, private communication). However, nucleosynthesis calculations still largely rely on post processing explosion
simulations via tracer particles, where one would prefer a direct coupling of nuclear reaction networks to the hydrodynamics (Bravo, 2020).
The predicted abundances of various isotopes are however only weakly sensitive to uncertainties in nuclear reaction rates (Bravo and
Mart´ınez-Pinedo, 2012). Last, terrestrial combustion experiments, in particular related to the DDT mechanism in unconfined media, can
provide useful insights into the treatment of combustion fronts in simulations of the explosion (Thomas et al., 2022).
Radiative-transfer simulations still represent a major hurdle in connecting explosion models with observations (light curves and spectra).
While a 3D treatment of the problem seems warranted, there is a trade-off to be made between the dimensionality and physical consistency
or resolution of the simulation, and full time-dependent non-LTE simulations are currently lacking. One related major limitation concerns
the availability of atomic data, whose accuracy can have a significant impact on spectroscopically determined abundances (Blondin et al.,
14This paper refers to the WFIRST project, since then rebaptized NGRST.

Type Ia supernovae
15
2023). Sophisticated numerical calculations are required to compute cross-sections for important atomic processes (e.g. photoionization,
collisional excitation) as these cannot all be measured in the laboratory.
5 Concluding remarks
Much progress has been made in recent years towards a better understanding of the progenitors and explosion mechanisms of SNe Ia.
High-cadence surveys have enabled to systematically discover new SNe Ia shortly after explosion and hence enable the study of their
earliest phases, and JWST has given the community access to high-quality spectroscopic diagnostics in the mid-IR range. While future
observational efforts will concentrate on gathering large samples of SNe Ia in the optical and near-IR ranges for cosmological studies,
detailed studies of individual events (including radio, X-ray and γ-ray observations when possible) remain paramount for constraining key
parameters of the explosion.
For a long time the single most-favored contender for explaining the bulk of SNe Ia, the MCh model is now invoked to explain more
peculiar events, such as Type Iax SNe which are thought to result from pure deflagrations of MCh WDs. The recent emergence of double
sub-MCh WD systems as the leading model for SNe Ia is an interesting reversal of the general consensus up to a decade ago, and testifies to
the dynamism of this field of research. However, a word of caution is in order, as future observational findings and modeling efforts might
be able to address some of the limitations of the MCh model. Likewise, future gravitational-wave detections of double-WD systems with
LISA will be able to confirm or disprove the double-degenerate scenario as the dominant channel for SNe Ia. The jury is still out, and new
ideas on how white dwarf stars explode will no doubt emerge in the coming years.
Acknowledgments
This chapter is dedicated to Tom Marsh (1961-2022), who introduced SB to the topic of Type Ia supernovae during his studies at the
University of Southampton. We thank Eduardo Bravo, Robert Fisher, Bruno Leibundgut, and Ken Shen for carefully reading and
providing detailed comments on a first draft of this chapter. We further acknowledge useful discussions with Luc Dessart, Roland
Diehl, Valeriya Korol, Friedrich (Fritz) R¨opke, Ivo Seitenzahl, with a special mention to Frank Timmes for inspiring the “Three basic
ingredients for a successful SN Ia model” box in Section 2. We thank Stefano Benetti for providing the light-curve data for SN 2002ic
used in Fig. 6 and Eugene Churazov for providing the SN 2014J data and model shown in Fig. 1. This work was supported by the
Alexander von Humboldt foundation, and by the ‘Programme National de Physique Stellaire’ (PNPS) of CNRS/INSU co-funded by
CEA and CNES.
See Also: Several chapters of the “Handbook of Supernovae” (Eds. A. W. Alsabti and P. Murdin), four of which are
referenced in the present chapter, cover many aspects of SNe Ia in more depth, including their cosmological appli-
cations. Many explosion models for SNe Ia are publicly available online at the Heidelberg Supernova Model Archive
(HESMA; https://hesma.h-its.org). The results of radiative-transfer simulations for supernova ejecta with the CMF-
GEN code are accessible on Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/communities/snrt), and the results of a radiative-transfer
code-comparison study are available on github (https://github.com/sn-rad-trans/data1; see Blondin et al. 2022a).
References
Altavilla G, Fiorentino G, Marconi M, Musella I, Cappellaro E and et al. (2004), Apr. Cepheid calibration of Type Ia supernovae and the Hubble
constant. MNRAS 349: 1344–1352. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.07616.x. arXiv:astro-ph/0401273.
Amaro-Seoane P, Andrews J, Arca Sedda M, Askar A, Baghi Q and et al. (2023), Mar. Astrophysics with the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna.
Living Reviews in Relativity 26 (1), 2. doi:10.1007/s41114-022-00041-y. 2203.06016.
Arendse N, Dhawan S, Sagu´es Carracedo A, Peiris HV, Goobar A and et al. (2024), Jul. Detecting strongly lensed type Ia supernovae with
LSST. MNRAS 531 (3): 3509–3523. doi:10.1093/mnras/stae1356. 2312.04621.
Arnett WD (1979), May. On the theory of Type I supernovae. ApJL 230: L37–L40. doi:10.1086/182957.
Badenes C, Hughes JP, Bravo E and Langer N (2007), Jun. Are the Models for Type Ia Supernova Progenitors Consistent with the Properties of
Supernova Remnants? ApJ 662 (1): 472–486. doi:10.1086/518022. astro-ph/0703321.
Bailey AC, Vincenzi M, Scolnic D, Cuillandre JC, Rhodes J, Hook I, Peterson ER and Popovic B (2023), Oct. Type Ia supernova observa-
tions combining data from the Euclid mission and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. MNRAS 524 (4): 5432–5441. doi:10.1093/mnras/stad2179.
2211.01206.
Bellm EC, Kulkarni SR, Graham MJ, Dekany R, Smith RM and et al. (2019), Jan. The Zwicky Transient Facility: System Overview, Performance,
and First Results. PASP 131 (995): 018002. doi:10.1088/1538-3873/aaecbe. 1902.01932.
Benz W, Hills JG and Thielemann FK (1989), Jul. Three-dimensional Hydrodynamical Simulations of Stellar Collision. II. White Dwarfs. ApJ 342:
986. doi:10.1086/167656.
Blondin S, Dessart L, Hillier DJ and Khokhlov AM (2013), Mar. One-dimensional delayed-detonation models of Type Ia supernovae: confrontation
to observations at bolometric maximum. MNRAS 429: 2127–2142. doi:10.1093/mnras/sts484. 1211.5892.
Blondin S, Dessart L and Hillier DJ (2015), Apr. A one-dimensional Chandrasekhar-mass delayed-detonation model for the broad-lined Type Ia
supernova 2002bo. MNRAS 448: 2766–2797. doi:10.1093/mnras/stv188. 1501.06583.
Blondin S, Dessart L, Hillier DJ and Khokhlov AM (2017), Sep. Evidence for sub-Chandrasekhar-mass progenitors of Type Ia supernovae at the
faint end of the width-luminosity relation. MNRAS 470: 157–165. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw2492. 1706.01901.

16
Type Ia supernovae
Blondin S, Blinnikov S, Callan FP, Collins CE, Dessart L and et al. (2022a), Dec. StaNdaRT: a repository of standardised test models and outputs
for supernova radiative transfer. A&A 668, A163. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202244134. 2209.11671.
Blondin S, Bravo E, Timmes FX, Dessart L and Hillier DJ (2022b), Apr. Stable nickel production in type Ia supernovae: A smoking gun for the
progenitor mass? A&A 660, A96. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202142323. 2109.13840.
Blondin S, Dessart L, Hillier DJ, Ramsbottom CA and Storey PJ (2023), Jun. Nebular spectra from Type Ia supernova explosion models compared
to JWST observations of SN 2021aefx. arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2306.07116doi:10.48550/arXiv.2306.07116. 2306.07116.
Bloom JS, Kasen D, Shen KJ, Nugent PE, Butler NR and et al. (2012), Jan. A Compact Degenerate Primary-star Progenitor of SN 2011fe. ApJL
744, L17. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/744/2/L17. 1111.0966.
Bochenek CD, Dwarkadas VV, Silverman JM, Fox OD, Chevalier RA, Smith N and Filippenko AV (2018), Jan. X-ray emission from SN 2012ca:
A Type Ia-CSM supernova explosion in a dense surrounding medium. MNRAS 473 (1): 336–344. doi:10.1093/mnras/stx2029. 1708.07181.
Bravo E (2020), May. The accuracy of post-processed nucleosynthesis. MNRAS 494 (2): 3037–3047. doi:10.1093/mnras/staa910. 2002.08486.
Bravo E and Mart´ınez-Pinedo G (2012), May. Sensitivity study of explosive nucleosynthesis in type Ia supernovae: Modification of individual
thermonuclear reaction rates. Phys. Rev. C 85 (5), 055805. doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.85.055805. 1204.1981.
Bravo E, Piersanti L, Blondin S, Dom´ınguez I, Straniero O and Cristallo S (2022), Nov. Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarfs are the progenitors
of a small fraction of Type Ia supernovae according to nucleosythesis constraints. MNRAS 517 (1): L31–L35. doi:10.1093/mnrasl/slac103.
2209.04020.
Bulla M, Sim SA, Pakmor R, Kromer M, Taubenberger S, R¨opke FK, Hillebrandt W and Seitenzahl IR (2016), Jan. Type Ia supernovae from
violent mergers of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs: polarization signatures. MNRAS 455 (1): 1060–1070. doi:10.1093/mnras/stv2402. 1510.04128.
Chandrasekhar S (1931), Jul. The Maximum Mass of Ideal White Dwarfs. ApJ 74: 81–+.
Churazov E, Sunyaev R, Isern J, Kn¨odlseder J, Jean P and et al. (2014), Aug. Cobalt-56 γ-ray emission lines from the type Ia supernova 2014J.
Nature 512 (7515): 406–408. doi:10.1038/nature13672. 1405.3332.
Colgate SA and McKee C (1969), Aug. Early Supernova Luminosity. ApJ 157: 623. doi:10.1086/150102.
Dessart L, Hillier DJ, Blondin S and Khokhlov A (2014), Apr. [Co III] versus Na I D in Type Ia supernova spectra. MNRAS 439: 3114–3120.
doi:10.1093/mnras/stu174. 1310.7750.
Dimitriadis G, Foley RJ, Rest A, Kasen D, Piro AL and et al. (2019), Jan. K2 Observations of SN 2018oh Reveal a Two-component Rising Light
Curve for a Type Ia Supernova. ApJL 870 (1), L1. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aaedb0. 1811.10061.
Dong S, Katz B, Kushnir D and Prieto JL (2015), Nov. Type Ia supernovae with bimodal explosions are common - possible smoking gun for direct
collisions of white dwarfs. MNRAS 454: L61–L65. doi:10.1093/mnrasl/slv129. 1401.3347.
Dwarkadas VV (2024), Jul. X-ray Observations of Two Type Ia Supernovae with an Hα Line in their Optical Spectrum. MNRAS doi:10.1093/mnras/
stae1628. 2407.00279.
Dwek E (2016), Jul. Iron: A Key Element for Understanding the Origin and Evolution of Interstellar Dust. ApJ 825 (2), 136. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/
825/2/136. 1605.01957.
Filippenko AV, Richmond MW, Branch D, Gaskell M, Herbst W and et al. (1992), Oct. The subluminous, spectroscopically peculiar type IA
supernova 1991bg in the elliptical galaxy NGC 4374. AJ 104: 1543–1556. doi:10.1086/116339.
Fink M, R¨opke FK, Hillebrandt W, Seitenzahl IR, Sim SA and Kromer M (2010), May. Double-detonation sub-Chandrasekhar supernovae: can
minimum helium shell masses detonate the core? A&A 514, A53. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/200913892. 1002.2173.
Firth RE, Sullivan M, Gal-Yam A, Howell DA, Maguire K and et al. (2015), Feb. The rising light curves of Type Ia supernovae. MNRAS 446 (4):
3895–3910. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu2314. 1411.1064.
Fl¨ors A, Spyromilio J, Taubenberger S, Blondin S, Cartier R, Leibundgut B, Dessart L, Dhawan S and Hillebrandt W (2020), Jan. Sub-
Chandrasekhar progenitors favoured for Type Ia supernovae: evidence from late-time spectroscopy. MNRAS 491 (2): 2902–2918. doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz3013. 1909.11055.
Ganeshalingam M, Li W, Filippenko AV, Silverman JM, Chornock R and et al. (2012), Feb. The Low-Velocity, Rapidly Fading Type Ia Supernova
2002es. ArXiv:1202.3140 [astro-ph.CO] 1202.3140.
Geier S, Nesslinger S, Heber U, Przybilla N, Napiwotzki R and Kudritzki RP (2007), Mar. The hot subdwarf B + white dwarf binary KPD
1930+2752. A supernova type Ia progenitor candidate. A&A 464 (1): 299–307. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20066098. astro-ph/0609742.
Hamuy M, Phillips MM, Suntzeff NB, Maza J, Gonz´alez LE and et al. (2003), Aug. An asymptotic-giant-branch star in the progenitor system of a
type Ia supernova. Nature 424: 651–654. arXiv:astro-ph/0306270.
Hicken M, Challis P, Jha S, Kirshner RP, Matheson T and et al. (2009), Jul. CfA3: 185 Type Ia Supernova Light Curves from the CfA. ApJ 700:
331–357. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/700/1/331. 0901.4787.
H¨oflich P (2006), Oct. Physics of type Ia supernovae. Nucl. Phys. A 777: 579–600. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysa.2004.12.038.
Horowitz CJ and Caplan ME (2021), Apr. Actinide Crystallization and Fission Reactions in Cooling White Dwarf Stars. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 (13),
131101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.131101. 2103.02122.
Hounsell R, Scolnic D, Foley RJ, Kessler R, Miranda V and et al. (2018), Nov. Simulations of the WFIRST Supernova Survey and Forecasts of
Cosmological Constraints. ApJ 867 (1), 23. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aac08b. 1702.01747.
Hoyle F and Fowler WA (1960), Nov. Nucleosynthesis in Supernovae. ApJ 132: 565–+.
Iben Jr. I and Tutukov AV (1984), Feb. Supernovae of type I as end products of the evolution of binaries with components of moderate initial
mass (M not greater than about 9 solar masses). ApJS 54: 335–372. doi:10.1086/190932.
Jeffery DJ (1999), Jul. Radioactive Decay Energy Deposition in Supernovae and the Exponential/Quasi-Exponential Behavior of Late-Time
Supernova Light Curves. ArXiv:9907015 astro-ph/9907015.
Jha SW (2017), Type Iax Supernovae, Alsabti AW and Murdin P, (Eds.), Handbook of Supernovae, pp. 375.
Justham S (2011), Apr. Single-degenerate Type Ia Supernovae Without Hydrogen Contamination. ApJL 730, L34. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/730/2/
L34. 1102.4913.
Kasen D (2010), Jan. Seeing the Collision of a Supernova with Its Companion Star. ApJ 708: 1025–1031. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/708/2/1025.
0909.0275.
Kasen D and Woosley SE (2007), Feb. On the Origin of the Type Ia Supernova Width-Luminosity Relation. ApJ 656: 661–665. doi:10.1086/510375.
arXiv:astro-ph/0609540.
Kasen D, Nugent P, Wang L, Howell DA, Wheeler JC and et al. (2003), Aug. Analysis of the Flux and Polarization Spectra of the Type Ia Supernova
SN 2001el: Exploring the Geometry of the High-Velocity Ejecta. ApJ 593: 788–808. doi:10.1086/376601. arXiv:astro-ph/0301312.
Kashi A and Soker N (2011), Oct. A circumbinary disc in the final stages of common envelope and the core-degenerate scenario for Type Ia
supernovae. MNRAS 417 (2): 1466–1479. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19361.x. 1105.5698.
Kashyap R, Fisher R, Garc´ıa-Berro E, Aznar-Sigu´an G, Ji S and Lor´en-Aguilar P (2015), Feb. Spiral Instability Can Drive Thermonuclear
Explosions in Binary White Dwarf Mergers. ApJL 800 (1), L7. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/800/1/L7. 1501.05645.
Katz B and Dong S (2012), Nov. The rate of WD-WD head-on collisions may be as high as the SNe Ia rate. arXiv e-prints ,

Type Ia supernovae
17
arXiv:1211.45841211.4584.
Katz B, Kushnir D and Dong S (2013), Jan. An exact integral relation between the Ni56 mass and the bolometric light curve of a type Ia
supernova. arXiv:1301.6766 [astro-ph] ArXiv: 1301.6766, http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.6766.
Kepler SO, Kleinman SJ, Nitta A, Koester D, Castanheira BG, Giovannini O, Costa AFM and Althaus L (2007), Mar. White dwarf mass distribution
in the SDSS. MNRAS 375: 1315–1324. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11388.x. astro-ph/0612277.
Kerzendorf WE, Strampelli G, Shen KJ, Schwab J, Pakmor R, Do T, Buchner J and Rest A (2018), Sep. A search for a surviving companion in
SN 1006. MNRAS 479 (1): 192–199. doi:10.1093/mnras/sty1357. 1709.06566.
Khokhlov AM (1991), May. Delayed detonation model for type IA supernovae. A&A 245: 114–128.
Kool EC, Johansson J, Sollerman J, Mold´on J, Moriya TJ and et al. (2023), May. A radio-detected type Ia supernova with helium-rich circumstellar
material. Nature 617 (7961): 477–482. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-05916-w. 2210.07725.
Korol V, Buscicchio R, Pakmor R, Mor´an-Fraile J, Moore CJ and de Mink SE (2024), Jul. Expected insights on type Ia supernovae from LISA’s
gravitational wave observations. arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2407.03935doi:10.48550/arXiv.2407.03935. 2407.03935.
Kosakowski D, Ugalino MI, Fisher R, Graur O, Bobrick A and Perets HB (2023), Feb. Using 44Ti emission to differentiate between thermonuclear
supernova progenitors. MNRAS 519 (1): L74–L78. doi:10.1093/mnrasl/slac152. 2210.10804.
Kromer M, Pakmor R, Taubenberger S, Pignata G, Fink M and et al. (2013), Nov. SN 2010lp—a Type Ia Supernova from a Violent Merger of
Two Carbon-Oxygen White Dwarfs. ApJL 778 (1), L18. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/778/1/L18. 1311.0310.
Kromer M, Fremling C, Pakmor R, Taubenberger S, Amanullah R and et al. (2016), Jul. The peculiar Type Ia supernova iPTF14atg:
Chandrasekhar-mass explosion or violent merger? MNRAS 459 (4): 4428–4439. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw962. 1604.05730.
Kwok LA, Siebert MR, Johansson J, Jha SW, Blondin S and et al. (2024), May. Ground-based and JWST Observations of SN 2022pul. II.
Evidence from Nebular Spectroscopy for a Violent Merger in a Peculiar Type Ia Supernova. ApJ 966 (1), 135. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad2c0d.
2308.12450.
Leibundgut B, Kirshner RP, Phillips MM, Wells LA, Suntzeff NB and et al. (1993), Jan. SN 1991bg - A type IA supernova with a difference. AJ
105: 301–313. doi:10.1086/116427.
Li W, Filippenko AV, Chornock R, Berger E, Berlind P and et al. (2003), Apr. SN 2002cx: The Most Peculiar Known Type Ia Supernova. PASP
115: 453–473. arXiv:astro-ph/0301428.
Lira P, Suntzeff NB, Phillips MM, Hamuy M, Maza J and et al. (1998), Jan. Optical Light Curves of the Type IA Supernovae SN 1990N and SN
1991T. AJ 115 (1): 234–246. doi:10.1086/300175. astro-ph/9709262.
Maeda K, Taubenberger S, Sollerman J, Mazzali PA, Leloudas G, Nomoto K and Motohara K (2010), Jan. Nebular Spectra and Explosion
Asymmetry of Type Ia Supernovae. ApJ 708: 1703–1715. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/708/2/1703. 0911.5484.
Maoz D and Mannucci F (2012), Jan. Type-Ia Supernova Rates and the Progenitor Problem: A Review. PASA 29: 447–465. doi:10.1071/AS11052.
1111.4492.
Maoz D, Mannucci F and Nelemans G (2014), Aug. Observational Clues to the Progenitors of Type Ia Supernovae. ARA&A 52: 107–170.
doi:10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-141031. 1312.0628.
Matheson T, Joyce RR, Allen LE, Saha A, Silva DR and et al. (2012), Jul. The Infrared Light Curve of SN 2011fe in M101 and the Distance to
M101. ApJ 754 (1), 19. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/19. 1205.3828.
Mazzali PA, Sullivan M, Hachinger S, Ellis RS, Nugent PE and et al. (2014), Apr. Hubble Space Telescope spectra of the Type Ia supernova SN
2011fe: a tail of low-density, high-velocity material with Z ¡ Z⊙. MNRAS 439 (2): 1959–1979. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu077. 1305.2356.
Nomoto K, Thielemann FK and Yokoi K (1984), Nov. Accreting white dwarf models of Type I supernovae. III - Carbon deflagration supernovae.
ApJ 286: 644–658. doi:10.1086/162639.
Nugent P, Phillips M, Baron E, Branch D and Hauschildt P (1995), Dec. Evidence for a Spectroscopic Sequence among Type 1a Supernovae.
ApJL 455: L147+. doi:10.1086/309846. arXiv:astro-ph/9510004.
Nugent PE, Sullivan M, Cenko SB, Thomas RC, Kasen D and et al. (2011), Dec. Supernova SN 2011fe from an exploding carbon-oxygen white
dwarf star. Nature 480: 344–347. doi:10.1038/nature10644. 1110.6201.
Pakmor R, Kromer M, R¨opke FK, Sim SA, Ruiter AJ and Hillebrandt W (2010), Jan. Sub-luminous type Ia supernovae from the mergers of
equal-mass white dwarfs with mass ∼0.9 M⊙. Nature 463: 61–64. doi:10.1038/nature08642. 0911.0926.
Pakmor R, Kromer M, Taubenberger S, Sim SA, R¨opke FK and Hillebrandt W (2012), Mar. Normal Type Ia Supernovae from Violent Mergers of
White Dwarf Binaries. ApJL 747, L10. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/747/1/L10. 1201.5123.
Pakmor R, Kromer M, Taubenberger S and Springel V (2013), Jun. Helium-ignited Violent Mergers as a Unified Model for Normal and Rapidly
Declining Type Ia Supernovae. ApJL 770, L8. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/770/1/L8. 1302.2913.
Pakmor R, Callan FP, Collins CE, de Mink SE, Holas A, Kerzendorf WE, Kromer M, Neunteufel PG, O’Brien JT, R¨opke FK, Ruiter AJ, Seitenzahl
IR, Shingles LJ, Sim SA and Taubenberger S (2022), Dec. On the fate of the secondary white dwarf in double-degenerate double-detonation
Type Ia supernovae. MNRAS 517 (4): 5260–5271. doi:10.1093/mnras/stac3107. 2203.14990.
Pakmor R, Seitenzahl IR, Ruiter AJ, Sim SA, R¨opke FK, Taubenberger S, Bieri R and Blondin S (2024), Jun. Type Ia supernova explosion models
are inherently multidimensional. A&A 686, A227. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202449637. 2402.11010.
Pelisoli I, Neunteufel P, Geier S, Kupfer T, Heber U and et al. (2021), Jul. A hot subdwarf-white dwarf super-Chandrasekhar candidate supernova
Ia progenitor. Nature Astronomy 5: 1052–1061. doi:10.1038/s41550-021-01413-0. 2107.09074.
Pereira R, Thomas RC, Aldering G, Antilogus P, Baltay C and et al. (2013), Jun. Spectrophotometric time series of SN 2011fe from the Nearby
Supernova Factory. A&A 554, A27. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201221008. 1302.1292.
Phillips MM (1993), Aug. The absolute magnitudes of Type IA supernovae. ApJL 413: L105–L108. doi:10.1086/186970.
Phillips MM, Wells LA, Suntzeff NB, Hamuy M, Leibundgut B, Kirshner RP and Foltz CB (1992), May. SN 1991T: Further Evidence of the
Heterogeneous Nature of Type IA Supernovae. AJ 103: 1632. doi:10.1086/116177.
Phillips MM, Ashall C, Brown PJ, Galbany L, Tucker MA and et al. (2024), Jul. 1991T-like Supernovae. ApJS 273 (1), 16. doi:10.3847/1538-4365/
ad4f7e. 2405.15027.
Pierel JDR, Engesser M, Coulter DA, DeCoursey C, Siebert MR and et al. (2024), Aug. Discovery of an Apparent Red, High-velocity Type Ia
Supernova at z = 2.9 with JWST. ApJL 971 (2), L32. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ad6908. 2406.05089.
Pinto PA and Eastman RG (2000), Feb. The Physics of Type IA Supernova Light Curves. II. Opacity and Diffusion. ApJ 530: 757–776. doi:
10.1086/308380.
Piro AL and Nakar E (2014), Mar. Constraints on Shallow 56Ni from the Early Light Curves of Type Ia Supernovae. ApJ 784, 85. doi:10.1088/
0004-637X/784/1/85. 1211.6438.
Poludnenko AY, Chambers J, Ahmed K, Gamezo VN and Taylor BD (2019), Nov. A unified mechanism for unconfined deflagration-to-detonation
transition in terrestrial chemical systems and type Ia supernovae. Science 366 (6465), aau7365. doi:10.1126/science.aau7365. 1911.00050.
Prieto JL, Chen P, Dong S, Bose S, Gal-Yam A, Holoien TWS, Kollmeier JA, Phillips MM and Shappee BJ (2020), Feb. Variable Hα Emission in
the Nebular Spectra of the Low-luminosity Type Ia SN2018cqj/ATLAS18qtd. ApJ 889 (2), 100. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab6323. 1909.05267.

18
Type Ia supernovae
Rabinak I, Livne E and Waxman E (2012), Sep. Early Emission from Type Ia Supernovae. ApJ 757 (1), 35. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/757/1/35.
1108.5548.
Richmond MW and Smith HA (2012), Apr. BVRI Photometry of SN 2011fe in M101. JAAVSO 40 (2): 872. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1203.4013.
1203.4013.
R¨opke FK (2017), Combustion in Thermonuclear Supernova Explosions, Alsabti AW and Murdin P, (Eds.), Handbook of Supernovae, pp. 1185.
Rosswog S, Ramirez-Ruiz E and Hix WR (2009), Apr. Tidal Disruption and Ignition of White Dwarfs by Moderately Massive Black Holes. ApJ
695 (1): 404–419. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/695/1/404. 0808.2143.
Scalzo RA, Ruiter AJ and Sim SA (2014), Dec. The ejected mass distribution of Type Ia supernovae: a significant rate of non-Chandrasekhar-
mass progenitors. MNRAS 445: 2535–2544. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu1808. 1408.6601.
Seitenzahl IR and Townsley DM (2017), Nucleosynthesis in Thermonuclear Supernovae, Alsabti AW and Murdin P, (Eds.), Handbook of Super-
novae, pp. 1955.
Seitenzahl IR, Cescutti G, R¨opke FK, Ruiter AJ and Pakmor R (2013a), Nov. Solar abundance of manganese: a case for near Chandrasekhar-
mass Type Ia supernova progenitors. A&A 559, L5. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201322599. 1309.2397.
Seitenzahl IR, Ciaraldi-Schoolmann F, R¨opke FK, Fink M, Hillebrandt W and et al. (2013b), Feb. Three-dimensional delayed-detonation models
with nucleosynthesis for Type Ia supernovae. MNRAS 429: 1156–1172. doi:10.1093/mnras/sts402. 1211.3015.
Shen KJ, Bildsten L, Kasen D and Quataert E (2012), Mar. The Long-term Evolution of Double White Dwarf Mergers. ApJ 748 (1), 35. doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/748/1/35. 1108.4036.
Shen KJ, Boubert D, G¨ansicke BT, Jha SW, Andrews JE and et al. (2018a), Sep. Three Hypervelocity White Dwarfs in Gaia DR2: Evidence for
Dynamically Driven Double-degenerate Double-detonation Type Ia Supernovae. ApJ 865 (1), 15. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aad55b. 1804.11163.
Shen KJ, Kasen D, Miles BJ and Townsley DM (2018b), Feb. Sub-Chandrasekhar-mass White Dwarf Detonations Revisited. ApJ 854, 52.
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aaa8de. 1706.01898.
Stritzinger M, Leibundgut B, Walch S and Contardo G (2006), Apr. Constraints on the progenitor systems of type Ia supernovae. A&A 450:
241–251. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20053652. arXiv:astro-ph/0506415.
Suyu SH, Huber S, Ca˜nameras R, Kromer M, Schuldt S and et al. (2020), Dec. HOLISMOKES. I. Highly Optimised Lensing Investigations of
Supernovae, Microlensing Objects, and Kinematics of Ellipticals and Spirals. A&A 644, A162. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202037757. 2002.08378.
Taubenberger S (2017), The Extremes of Thermonuclear Supernovae, Alsabti AW and Murdin P, (Eds.), Handbook of Supernovae, pp. 317.
Taubenberger S, Benetti S, Childress M, Pakmor R, Hachinger S and et al. (2011), Apr. High luminosity, slow ejecta and persistent carbon lines:
SN 2009dc challenges thermonuclear explosion scenarios. MNRAS 412: 2735–2762. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.18107.x. 1011.5665.
Taubenberger S, Kromer M, Hachinger S, Mazzali PA, Benetti S and et al. (2013), Jul. ‘Super-Chandrasekhar’ Type Ia Supernovae at nebular
epochs. MNRAS 432 (4): 3117–3130. doi:10.1093/mnras/stt668. 1304.4952.
Thomas JC, Rodriguez FA, Teitge DS, Kunka LN, Gaddis GN and et al. (2022), Jul. An experimental study of shock transmission from a
detonation tube. Shock Waves 32 (5): 427–436. doi:10.1007/s00193-022-01086-2.
Tonry JL, Denneau L, Heinze AN, Stalder B, Smith KW, Smartt SJ, Stubbs CW, Weiland HJ and Rest A (2018), Jun. ATLAS: A High-cadence
All-sky Survey System. PASP 130 (988): 064505. doi:10.1088/1538-3873/aabadf. 1802.00879.
Travaglio C, Hillebrandt W, Reinecke M and Thielemann F (2004), Oct. Nucleosynthesis in multi-dimensional SN Ia explosions. A&A 425: 1029–
1040. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20041108. arXiv:astro-ph/0406281.
Tucker MA and Shappee BJ (2024), Feb. The HST Nondetection of SN Ia 2011fe 11.5 yr after Explosion Further Restricts Single-degenerate
Progenitor Systems. ApJ 962 (1), 74. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ad1b4e. 2308.08599.
Tucker MA, Shappee BJ, Kochanek CS, Stanek KZ, Ashall C, Anand GS and Garnavich P (2022), Dec. The whisper of a whimper of a bang:
2400 d of the Type Ia SN 2011fe reveals the decay of 55Fe. MNRAS 517 (3): 4119–4131. doi:10.1093/mnras/stac2873. 2111.01144.
Turatto M, Benetti S, Cappellaro E, Danziger IJ, Della Valle M, Gouiffes C, Mazzali PA and Patat F (1996), Nov. The properties of the peculiar
type Ia supernova 1991bg. I. Analysis and discussion of two years of observations. MNRAS 283: 1–17. arXiv:astro-ph/9605178.
van Kerkwijk MH, Chang P and Justham S (2010), Oct. Sub-Chandrasekhar White Dwarf Mergers as the Progenitors of Type Ia Supernovae.
ApJL 722: L157–L161. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/722/2/L157. 1006.4391.
Webbink RF (1984), Feb. Double white dwarfs as progenitors of R Coronae Borealis stars and Type I supernovae. ApJ 277: 355–360. doi:
10.1086/161701.
Wood-Vasey WM, Wang L and Aldering G (2004), Nov. Photometry of SN 2002ic and Implications for the Progenitor Mass-Loss History. ApJ
616 (1): 339–345. doi:10.1086/424826. astro-ph/0406191.
Wygoda N, Elbaz Y and Katz B (2019), Apr. Type Ia supernovae have two physical width-luminosity relations and they favour sub-Chandrasekhar
and direct collision models - I. Bolometric. MNRAS 484 (3): 3941–3950. doi:10.1093/mnras/stz145. 1711.00969.
Yoon SC and Langer N (2005), Jun. On the evolution of rapidly rotating massive white dwarfs towards supernovae or collapses. A&A 435 (3):
967–985. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20042542. astro-ph/0502133.

