Intra-operative Optimal Flow Diverter Selection for Intracranial aneurysm treatment  
Parmita Mondal1,2, Mohammed Mahdi Shiraz Bhurwani1,2,3, Kyle A Williams1,2, Ciprian N Ionita1,2,3  
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260  
2Canon Stroke and Vascular Research Center, Buffalo, NY 14203  
3Quantitative Angiographic Systems. Artificial Intelligence, Buffalo, NY 14203 
Abstract  
Purpose:  
 During intracranial aneurysm (IA) treatment with Diverters (FDs), the device/parent artery diameters ratio may 
influence the ability of the device to induce aneurysm healing response. Oversized FDs are safer to deploy but may 
not induce enough hemodynamic resistance to ensure aneurysm occlusion. Methods based on Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) could allow optimal device selection but are time-consuming and inadequate for intra-operative 
guidance. To address this limitation, we propose to investigate a method for optimal FD selection using Angiographic 
Parametric Imaging (API) and machine learning (ML).  
 
Materials and Methods:  
We selected 128 pre-treatment angiographic sequences of that were fully occluded at minimum six months follow-
up. For each IA, we extracted five API parameters from the aneurysm dome and normalized them to the feeding 
artery corresponding parameters. We dichotomized the dataset base on the FD/ proximal artery diameter ratio as 
undersized, if the ratio<1 or if multiple FDs were used and oversized in the other cases. Using area under the receiver 
operator characteristic (AUROC), single API parameter and ML analysis was used to determine whether API 
parameters could be used to determine the need for FD under-sizing (i.e., increase flow resistance).   
  
Results: In total we identified 51 and 77 cases for the undersized and oversized cohorts respectively.  Single API 
parameter analysis yielded an inadequate AUROC  
~0.5 while machine learning using all five API parameters yielded and AUROC of 0.72±0.02. 
  
Conclusion:  
 Machine learning based on pre-treatment API could be used to optimize FD selection to improve the aneurysm 
occlusion rates 
  
Background  
 
Flow diverters (FDs) are relatively new devices used for the treatment of intracranial aneurysms (IA). As shown in 
Figure 1, reproduced from Shapiro et. al,1 for a deployed FD, the metal coverage across the aneurysm neck is 
dependent on the device diameter selection relative to the parent artery. Under sizing of the device will require 
compressing of the device to reach the nominal artery and achieving more coverage of the IA neck. This approach is 
not risk free, since the device could 
percolate in the aneurysm neck due to 
catheter pushing force, with devastating 
consequences.  CFD simulations could 
provide a solution by recommending 
whether under sizing of a device is 
needed, but they are time consuming 
and 
may 
be 
unsuitable 
for 
intraoperative decision. We propose to 
investigate whether a method based on 
a routine angiography acquired during 
the endovascular procedure could be 
developed to make a real time recommendation whether under sizing of the device is needed in order to achieve 
full aneurysm occlusion (i.e., healing).  
Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) is a technique used in interventional radiology to visualize blood 
vessels and its surrounding environment. We use the temporal information of the contrast propagation in the blood 
vessels given by the DSA for better diagnosis.2,3 The temporal and spatial distribution of the contrast can be useful 

in performing Angiographic Parametric Imaging (API). This is done by using time- density curves to calculate Time to 
peak (TTP), Mean transit time (MTT), Time to arrival (TTA), Peak height (PH) and Area Under the Curve (AUC) using 
an API software. Previous work has demonstrated that the API can be combined with data driven methods to predict 
aneurysm occlusion immediately after device deployment with a high accuracy.4 While this approach could have 
significant clinical application, it still requires a pre- and post-device angiogram, allowing the interventionalist to 
readjust the treatment only after the first device has been already placed. In this study we propose to extend this 
approach and determine whether it is possible to make a recommendation for device placement based only on the 
initial (i.e., pre-device placement) API data. 
  
Material and Methods  
Data Collection  
 
Data collection and analysis was approved by our Institutional Review Board. The Figure 2 shows chronologically the 
steps taken to complete this study. DSA scans of n=200 patients were recorded with images before placing the FD 
(pre-treatment cases) and after placing the FD (post-treatment cases). A follow-up scan of at least 6 months from 
the placing of treatment were also considered for these images. We used the follow-up to select only the cases that 
demonstrated full occlusion at six months. The reason for selecting these cases is because the outcome indicates 
that the device resistance was sufficient to induce aneurysm occlusion. Next, we dichotomized the group based on 
the FD/artery diameter ratio. If the diameter of the FD is less than the proximal artery, or if multiple FDs were 
used the case was assigned to the undersized cohort (n=51). The remaining cases (n=77) were assigned to the 
oversized cohort.  
 
During the actual interventions dozens of (DSA) sequences are acquired for structure assessment. Since the 
contrast flow obeys the convection equation, the contrast spatial and temporal variability should be directly related 
to the local vascular hemodynamics. Two-dimensional angiographic parametric imaging API provides a better way 
to measure hemodynamics by 
encoding 
contrast 
flow 
parameters from angiograms 
into a single map that conveys 
both 
structure 
and 
hemodynamics related imaging 
biomarkers. Thus, API is a 
semiquantitative angiographic 
tool that generates a set of 
vascular maps, where each 
pixel is colored according to the 
intensity of a certain flow 
parameter. To achieve this, the 
contrast is monitored in each 
frame 
at 
each 
pixel 
to 
synthesize a time density curve 
(TDC), which we parametrize to 
extract the mean transit time (MTT), time to peak (TTP), time to arrival (TTA), peak height (PH) and area under the 
curve (AUC). This information is used to create a parametrized description of blood flow over the entire vasculature 
to assess aspects of the flow in a specific lesion, in our case the IA.  Each parameter reflects one aspect of 
hemodynamics information from the angiogram, the combination of which greatly increases the accuracy of the 
predicted outcome and effects. To reduce hand injection variability, we normalized each parameter to the inlet 
corresponding values to yield NI-MTT, NI-TTP, NI-TTA, NI-PH and NI-AUC, respectively. Normalized parameters were 
analyzed in Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) using standard ROC analysis. T-test was performed for each 
API parameter using the null hypothesis that: The single API parameter distribution between the two cohorts is the 
same.  
A machine learning algorithm based on deep learning neural network (DNN) design was developed in Keras. 
The model had five layers with 3, 40, 55, 45 and 1 nodes respectively. The input normalized API parameters were: 

TTP, MTT, TTA, PH and AUC.5  The optimizer and loss function are two vital steps in compiling the model. We used 
‘adam’ optimizer and ‘mean_squared_error’ as our loss function. A fivefold Monte Carlo Cross Validation was used 
to ensure that poor or excellent performances are not accidental. Accuracy and Area under the Receiver Operating 
Characteristics (AUROC) were evaluated after each training.  
 
Results  
API data distribution between the undersized and oversized cohorts is demonstrated using a box and Whisker plot 
in Figure 3. T-test analysis demonstrated that the null hypothesis was retained for every parameter except, NI-TTA 
and NI-PH with a significance of 0.47 and 0.31 respectively. ROC analysis for single API parameter also demonstrated 
weak predictive capability for under-sizing the FD. Most parameters were slightly larger than the chance line (Figure 
4). TTA seemed to have a moderate predictability value with AUROC of 0.604.  
The ML algorithm increased tremendously the prediction capabilities. The mean AUROC after fivefold MCCV was 
0.72±0.02 with a range of (0.71-0.75), Figure 6.  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 

 
 
Conclusion  
This is a novel attempt to integrate API parameters with DNN to determine correlation between API parameters 
and hemodynamics and predict the optimal FD selection. The DNNs performed well giving an accuracy of 90% and 
AUC of 0.72±0.02 when used with normalized data.  
  
Acknowledgments   
This work was supported by QAS.AI and NSF STTR Award # 2111865    
  
References  
1. 
Shapiro M, Raz E, Becske T, Nelson PK. Variable porosity of the pipeline embolization device in straight 
and curved vessels: a guide for optimal deployment strategy. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2014; 35:727-733. 
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3742  
2. 
Shiraz Bhurwani MM, Waqas M, Podgorsak AR, Williams KA, Davies JM, Snyder K, Levy E, Siddiqui A, Ionita 
CN. Feasibility study for use of angiographic parametric imaging and deep neural networks for intracranial 
aneurysm occlusion prediction. J Neurointerv Surg. 2020; 12:714-719. doi: 10.1136/neurintsurg-2019-
015544  
3. 
Williams KA, Podgorsak AR, Bhurwani MMS, Rava RA, Sommer KN, Ionita CN. The Aneurysm Occlusion 
Assistant, an AI platform for real time surgical guidance of intracranial aneurysms. Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt 
Eng. 2021;11601. doi: 10.1117/12.2581003  
4. 
Hussein AE, Shownkeen M, Thomas A, Stapleton C, Brunozzi D, Nelson J, Naumgart J, Linninger A, Atwal G, 
Alaraj A. 2D parametric contrast time-density analysis for the prediction of complete aneurysm occlusion 
at six months' post-flow diversion stent. Interv Neuroradiol. 2020; 26:468-475. doi: 
10.1177/1591019920908205  
5. 
Ionita CN, Suri H, Nataranjian S, Siddiqui A, Levy E, Hopkins NL, Bednarek DR, Rudin S. Angiographic 
imaging evaluation of patient-specific bifurcation-aneurysm phantom treatment with pre-shaped, self-
expanding, flow-diverting stents: feasibility study. Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. 2011; 7965:79651H79651-
79651H79659. doi: 10.1117/12.877675  
  
 

