PZT Optical Memristors 
Chenlei Li1+, Hongyan Yu2+, Tao Shu1+, Yueyang Zhang1, Chengfeng Wen1, Hengzhen Cao1, Jin Xie1, 
Hanwen Li1, Zixu Xu1, Gong Zhang1, Zejie Yu1, Huan Li1, Liu Liu1, Yaocheng Shi1, Feng Qiu2*, 
Daoxin Dai1,3* 
1State Key Laboratory for Extreme Photonics and Instrumentation, College of Optical Science and 
Engineering, International Research Center for Advanced Photonics, Zhejiang University, Zijingang 
Campus, Hangzhou 310058, China 
2 Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 
310024, Zhejiang Province, China 
3 Intelligent Optics and Photonics Research Center, Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University, 
Jiaxing 314000, China 
+These authors contributed equally to this work. 
*Corresponding Author: dxdai@zju.edu.cn; A-photonics@outlook.com 
 
Abstract 
Optical memristors represent a monumental leap in the fusion of photonics and electronics, heralding a 
new era of new applications from neuromorphic computing to artificial intelligence. However, current 
technologies are hindered by complex fabrication, limited endurance, high optical loss or low 
modulation efficiency. For the first time, we unprecedentedly reveal optical non-volatility in thin-film 
Lead Zirconate Titanate (PZT) by electrically manipulating the ferroelectric domains to control the 
refractive index, providing a brand-new routine for optical memristors. The developed PZT optical 
memristors offer unprecedented advantages more than exceptional performance metrics like low loss, 
high precision, high-efficiency modulation, high stability quasi-continuity and reconfigurability. The 
wafer-scale sol-gel fabrication process also ensures compatible with standardized mass fabrication 
processes and high scalability for photonic integration. Specially, these devices also demonstrate unique 
functional duality: setting above a threshold voltage enables non-volatile behaviors, below this threshold 
allows volatile high-speed optical switching. This marks the first-ever optical memristor capable of 
performing high-speed signal processing and non-volatile retention on a single platform, and is also the 
inaugural demonstration of scalable functional systems. The PZT optical memristors developed here 
facilitate the realization of novel paradigms for high-speed and energy-efficient optical interconnects, 
programmable PICs, quantum computing, neural networks, in-memory computing and brain-like 
architecture. 
 
Introduction 
Memristors, with the ability to modulate signals actively and hold memory states akin to synaptic activity 
in the mammalian brain, have opened new avenues to non-volatile memory and neuromorphic 
computing, significantly improving energy efficiency and integration density while bypassing the von 
Neumann bottleneck 1. Inspired by the remarkable capabilities and technological promise of electronic 
memristors, the photonics community has been striving to develop an optical counterpart called optical 
memristors, which are capable of modulating the light amplitude/phase and holding the state non-
volatilely2. Optical memristors represent a monumental leap in the fusion of photonics and electronics, 
heralding a new era of high-speed energy-efficient information processing that promises to transcend 
the constraints of traditional architectures.  
Significant efforts haves been made towards developing optical memristors to create new paradigms in 
photonic integrated circuits (PICs), and catalyze the emergence of new applications, including high-
efficiency in-memory computing3-6, brain-inspired architectures7, post-fabrication trimming of PICs for 
calibrating the operation of sophisticated programmable optical processors with fabrication-sensitive 
structures, see more details in Supplementary section 1. Among them, phase-change materials (PCMs) 

8-16 have received substantial attention owing to some favorable property, while the difficulty in the 
inherent control mechanism for the amorphous/crystalline phase change might hinder the wide 
application in large-scale integration2. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)17,18 and charge-
based19,20 optical memristors are interesting but still suffer from the fabrication complexity or inability 
for multi-level tuning, and few experimental demonstrations have been reported so far2. Ferroelectric 
material is another option allows storage of optical information by switching non-volatile ferroelectric 
domains through applying an external electric field21,22. In ref. 22, the Pockels coefficient was 
controllable, and hence the refractive index changed under a direct current (DC) bias applied to the thin-
film BaTiO3 (BTO). However, the heterogeneous integration of thin-film BTO required a few 
complicated processes including molecular beam epitaxy, direct wafer bonding and wafer grinding, 
while the modulation depth of 2×10-3 and the propagation loss of 4.8 dB/cm for the BTO waveguides 
leave space for further refinement. Furthermore, an external DC bias was needed continuously and thus 
maintaining the state still requires power supply, resulting in continuous power consumption at the idle 
state. Therefore, more efforts are expected to explore a brand-new routine for optical memristors in terms 
of optical performance, switching speed, energy, fabrication process, as well as the capability for scaling 
to system-level integration2. 
In this work, we reveal optical non-volatility and volatility in thin-film PZT for the first time. 
Differently from BTO, we can precisely control the refractive index directly by electrically manipulating 
the ferroelectric domain polarization, no bias voltage is required, providing a new platform of realizing 
optical memristors. The PZT optical memristors successfully developed here, including representative 
building blocks such as microring resonators (MRRs), Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs), and 
Fabry-Pérot (FP) cavities—essential elements with versatile functionality for advancing large-scale, on-
chip programmable photonic systems23 and showcase electrically reconfigurable and 64-level quasi-
continuous non-volatile phase-tuning with sub-microjoule switching energy and zero maintaining power 
as well as long-term stability over weeks. We also demonstrate the scalability of PZT optical memristors 
for developing PICs, featuring a memristive optical switch matrix and an adaptive memristive cavity. 
The wafer-scale sol-gel fabrication process developed for thin-film PZT not only ensures CMOS 
compatibility and scalability but also maintains low propagation losses, making it ideal for on-chip 
photonic integration in wafer-scale. Specifically, our PZT optical memristors have a unique functional 
duality related with a threshold voltage Vth, which has not yet been available in reported platforms: 
operating above Vth enables non-volatility with permanent changes in domain polarization, while 
working below Vth achieves fast volatile optical switching/modulation with high-efficiency Pockels 
effect. This marks the first-ever optical memristor capable of performing high-speed signal processing 
and non-volatile retention on a single platform, and presents the inaugural demonstration of scalable 
functional systems with electrical-controlled optical memristors. Our finding underscores the great 
promise for wide applications in high-speed and energy-efficient optical interconnects24, programmable 
PICs25,quantum computing26,27, neural networks4,28, in-memory computing6 and brain-like computing29. 
 
 

Results       
 
Fig. 1 | Optical PZT memristor. a. Wafer-scale sol-gel fabrication processes of PZT Optical Memristors. b. Photograph 
of the spin-coating wafer demonstrating uniform and defect-free bonding. c. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) picture 
of top view of the thin-film PZT (thickness~ 300nm). d. AFM image of the thin-film PZT. e. Photograph of a 4-inch 
wafer including the fabricated PZT optical memristors patterned by using an ultraviolet stepper lithography system. f. 
Colorized SEM of PZT MRR (blue). g. SEM picture of the cross section of a PZT ridge waveguide. h. Schematic 
diagram of the ridge waveguide cross-section and the poling process. i. PZT unit cell representation before and after 
poling. j. The dependence of the refractive index changes ∆𝑛𝑛eff(𝑃𝑃𝜈𝜈) against the net ferroelectric domain polarization, 
and the corresponding simplified top-view schematic of ferroelectric domains in PZT. k. Hysteresis loop of Vset/Vreset 
against ∆𝑛𝑛eff l Optical microscopy image of an MRR with a bending radius of 60 μm. m. Single-cycle demonstration 
of one distinct non-volatile state，inset: procedure of setting protocol. n. Measured transmissions at the through port 
of the MRR-based PZT optical memristor with different setting voltages Vset. o. Measured resonance-wavelength 
detuning of the MRR-based PZT optical memristor set with different setting voltages Vset as the driving voltage Vdr 
varies. p. Eye diagrams for NRZ modulation at the data rate of 48 Gbps with a driving voltage Vdr of 3 V. 

The fabrication of thin-film PZT wafers and optical waveguides was carried out with the sol-gel process, 
as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1a-g (see more details in Methods). The 4-inch PZT wafer was 
realized with a top-surface roughness of 0.7 nm and a thickness non-uniformity less than 5 nm, as shown 
in Fig. 1b-d. All the following processes, including the lithography, dry etching, and by-product cleaning 
processes, were optimized for achieving PZT optical waveguides with smooth sidewalls/top-surfaces, 
enabling high-quality building blocks and multi-functional photonic integrated circuits (PICs), as 
depicted in (Fig. 1e-g). Such a wafer-scale sol-gel fabrication process developed for PZT PICs ensures 
excellent CMOS compatibility and high scalability as well as low-cost production. The cross-section of 
the fabricated PZT waveguide is shown in Fig. 1e, where the poling electrodes are strategically placed 
on the slab and on both sides of the ridge. 
As a ferroelectric material, PZT possesses a perovskite crystal structure. Initially, the crystal is in a 
paraelectric phase, with positive and negative charge centers aligned at the body center (see the left part 
of Fig. 1i). When a poling voltage Vpol is applied to the thin-film PZT, Zr and Ti4+ ions shift towards one 
of the eight vertices, causing a displacement of the positive and negative charge centers. This shift 
introduces the domain reorientation of PZT, enhancing its polarizability. As a result, these compositions 
exhibit excellent dielectric and ferroelectric properties30 (Fig. 1i). After removing the external electric 
field, the ferroelectric domain inside the thin-film PZT maintains a certain degree of polarization, known 
as remanent polarization31. The refractive index neff(Pν) of thin-film PZT is related to the remnant 
polarization in PZT32, i.e., 
𝑛𝑛eff(𝑃𝑃𝜈𝜈) = 𝑛𝑛eff0 + 𝑛𝑛1
𝑃𝑃𝜈𝜈2
𝑃𝑃02,                              (1) 
where neff0 is the refraction index of thin-film PZT with random polarization, n1 is the relative refractive 
index, Pν is the net ferroelectric domain polarization, and P0 is the ferroelectric domain polarization on 
the boundary of the thin film. According to equation (1), a different ratio of the mixed-polarization 
domains in PZT, depending on Vset, would result in a different refractive index neff(Pν), as described in 
Fig. 1j (Supplementary section 2). Therefore, non-volatile “SET” process can be controlled by applying 
different setting voltage Vset, which is maintained for about one minute to stabilize the ferroelectric 
domain and thus achieve different neff(Pν). Similarly, applying a reverse voltage can reset the net 
ferroelectric domain polarization in PZT to its initial state. The relationship between Δneff against Vset is 
depicted by the hysteresis loop of PZT given in Fig. 1k.  
Notably, the device is revealed to exhibit a unique functional duality related with a threshold voltage 
Vth. To achieve the non-volatile effect, the applied voltage should be higher than Vth to induce notable 
changes in ferroelectric domain polarization. On the other hand, when the voltage is less than Vth, the 
weak electric field does not induce notable changes in ferroelectric domain polarization, and thus the 
refractive index is modulated electrically via the Pockels effect in PZT volatilely, providing an effective 
routine for realizing high-speed electro-optic (EO) modulation or switching without triggering the non-
volatile effect. 
According to this principle, we employed a thin-film PZT MRR for realizing multi-level non-volatile 
operation and high-speed volatile operation post-poling (Fig. 1l). With an electrode spacing of 4 μm, the 
threshold voltage for this MRR is determined experimentally as ~8 V. Fig. 1m shows a single-cycle 
demonstration of one distinct non-volatile state and varying the setting voltage Vset results in multi-level 
non-volatile resonance-wavelength detuning, as illustrated in Fig. 1n. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy 
(PFM) images intuitively show the change of the domain polarizations in the thin-film PZT waveguide 
with different setting voltages Vset in Supplementary section 3. For high-speed volatile operation, with 
the present MRR, The EO modulation efficiency of the PZT waveguides and its dependence on Vset were 
firstly characterized by measuring the resonance-wavelength detuning of the fabricated MRR against 
the driving voltage Vdr when it was set with Vset= 0, 10, 15, and 20 V. Here Vdr was varied from −8 V to 
8 V, staying below the threshold, as shown in Fig. 1o. When Vdr was negative (i.e., opposite to the poling 
direction), the measured modulation efficiency was about 42, 25, 12, and 6 pm/V with Vset= 0, 10, 15, 
and 20 V, respectively. When Vdr was positive, the modulation efficiency became 26, 33, 20, and 23 
pm/V, respectively. Such asymmetry of the Vset-dependence for the modulation efficiency is attributed 

to the special mechanism in PZT, as expected by our theoretical prediction in Supplementary section 2. 
Then high-speed EO modulation for NRZ signals was demonstrated by using the setup described in 
method. As given in Fig. 1p, the recorded NRZ eye-diagram with a driving voltage Vdr of 3 V at 48 Gbps, 
showcases the functional duality of the present PZT memristor enabling high-speed modulation.  
Further measurements confirmed the fabricated PZT waveguide had a low propagation loss of ~1.9 
dB/cm and low temperature sensitivity of ~30 pm/°C (Supplementary sections 4 and 5). Additionally, 
we also investigated the DC drift of the thin-film PZT waveguides (Supplementary Section 6), finding 
high stability with a negligible phase drift of less than 0.05π. The ability to address the issue of DC 
drifting, which often challenges other EO modulators or switches fabricated on e.g. thin-film lithium 
niobate33, is very promising for various applications with optical switching and modulation.  
Consequently, thin-film PZT provides a promising option as a brand-new platform for developing on-
chip optical memristors, and thus we present several representative building blocks for various 
applications in the following sections.   
 
Building blocks 
MZI-based PZT optical memristors 
MZIs are crucial fundamental components for photonic systems on a chip, encompassing the versatile 
functionality of e.g. optical modulation, optical switching, variable optical attenuation, optical filtering, 
variable optical splitting for optical interconnects and optical computing 34,35. For example, large-scale 
photonic switches are typically assembled from 2×2 MZI switches interconnected into networks or 
arrays of various topologies, including cross-bar, Benes, and path-independent loss (PI-Loss), along with 
their numerous variants 28,34,36. However, developing large-scale PICs presents significant challenges, 
particularly in calibrating a large number of MZI elements due to random phase errors in their initial 
states, which often require complex processes and additional power consumption. In this section, we 
demonstrate MZI-based PZT optical memristors for optical switching, Fig. 2a-b, highlighting their 
potential to simplify the calibration and non-volatile reconfigurability as well as volatile high-speed 
optical signal processing. 
The present MZI-based PZT optical memristor, consists of two imbalanced arms and two 2×2 
multimode interferometers with a splitting ratio of 50%: 50%. Electrodes used for applying a lateral 
electric field were placed on both sides of these two arm waveguides, forming the phase shifters with 
the length of e.g. ~1.0 mm. Initially, we poled the arm waveguides by applying the voltage in the 
direction shown in Fig. 2a. Fig. 2c shows the measured non-volatile quasi-continuous tuning of the notch 
wavelength as Vset increases with 20 levels, achieving a fine resolution of 100 pm per level with steps of 
less than 1.0 V. Especially, a non-volatile phase shift of π was achieved when Vset=15.0 V. The power 
consumption for non-volatile setting is in sub-microjoule scale, owing to a near-zero leakage current 
(less than ~0.05 nA) in the thin-film PZT (Supplementary section 7). Importantly, thin-film PZT can be 
reset by applying a high poling voltage Vpol of ~80 V when needed, thereby erasing the setting state of 
PZT optical memristors.  
To further demonstrate the functional duality of thin-film PZT, the MZI operated in a push-pull 
configuration shown in Fig. 2a for high-speed optical signal processing with a driving voltage Vdr lower 
than Vth. Fig. 2d shows the measurement results when 4 Vpp (Voltage peak-peak) was applied with 10 
MHz frequency (Methods), indicating that the device is switchable in nano-second scale. Fig. 2e presents 
the measured transmissions at the cross port of the MZI with 1-mm-long phase shifters when operating 
with Vdr= 0 and 5.0 V, respectively, showing that a phase-shifting of π was achieved, and correspondingly 
the modulation efficiency VπL is about 0.5 V∙cm. The estimated Pockels coefficient of the post-poling 
PZT is as high as 120 pm/V, which is over four times higher than that of lithium niobate37, thus paving 
a revolutionary routine for realizing high-efficiency and high-speed EO switching/modulation. 

 
 
Fig. 2 | The present MZI-based PZT optical memristors. a. Schematic of the MZI -based 2×2 PZT optical 
memristors, consisting of two imbalanced arms with 1-mm-long phase shifters and two 2×2 multimode interferometers 
with a splitting ratio of 50%: 50%; the purple arrow represents the direction of the poling electric field; the blue arrow 
represents the direction of the applied drive voltage Vdr. b. Optical microscopy image of the fabricated 2×2 MZI optical 
memristors. c. Quasi-continuous tuning of the wavelength notch with the setting voltage Vset varying from 8 V to 32 V. 
Before the setting voltage is applied to set any state, this optical memristor was re-initialized by applying a high poling 
voltage Vpol of 80 V. d. Real-time optical modulation measurements. Normalized output intensity from the through port 
when the device operates with a drive voltage Vdr of 4 Vpp at the frequency of 10 MHz. The upper one represents the 
input electrical signals, and the bottom one represents the switched optical signals. e. Measured transmissions at the 
cross port when operating with Vdr =0 and 5.0 V, respectively. 
 
 

FP-cavity-based PZT optical memristors 
Optical cavities have been recognized as another key element for realizing various functionality 
(including optical filtering, modulation or switching) due to the great advantages in structure flexibility, 
footprint compactness and energy efficiency 38-40. Unfortunately, the resonance wavelengths are often 
extremely susceptible to the fabrication variations and thus one often needs to thermally or electrically tune the 
resonance wavelength for alignment with additional high-power consumption41. In this section, we propose a 
1×2-FP-cavity-based PZT optical memristor, as shown in Fig. 3a-b (more design details in 
Supplementary section 8). Note that the present device has a short cavity length, enabling a free spectral 
range (FSR) as large as 8 nm, which is much larger than regular MRRs on the same chip, helping to 
clearly observe the multi-level non-volatility revealed here. With this PZT optical memristor, we 
achieved quasi-continuous 64-level (6-bit) non-volatile setting by varying the voltage Vset from 10 V to 
36 V, as shown in Fig. 3c-d. The maximum wavelength-detuning reaches up to 3.0 nm and the 
corresponding non-volatile refractive-index change was approximately 4.6×10-3 (Supplementary section 
9). Such quasi-continuous non-volatility enables the phase-shift manipulating of photonic devices 
precisely. Meanwhile, the Q-factor of the resonance peaks remains almost unchanged, indicating that 
the multi-level non-volatility enabled by manipulating the domain polarization in thin-film PZT does 
not introduce a notable influence on the waveguide’s propagation loss. More levels of non-volatility 
could be achieved by further refining the setting voltage Vset.   
Fig. 3e demonstrates the remarkable repeatability and stability of the FP-cavity-based optical 
memristor by characterizing five target states set with Vset=30, 21, 23, 25, and 36 V as examples, 
respectively. For each target state, the following cycle process was repeated 20 times (Supplementary 
section 10): (i) setting the target state; (ii) measuring the resonance wavelength; (ii) erasing to the initial 
state. These twenty resonance wavelengths corresponding to the same setting voltage Vset have very 
excellent consistency and repeatability with a minor wavelength variation of less than ±0.05 nm, 
validating the great potential of PZT optical memristors for creating highly reliable and multi-level non-
volatile photonic elements, more details are shown in Supplementary section 11. 
The functional duality of the FP-cavity-based PZT memristor was also showcased in experiments. 
When operating below Vth, this PZT memristor demonstrated its availability for high-speed optical 
switching/modulation. In particular, temporal responses of the device were measured with different 
modulation frequencies of 1 Hz, 100 kHz, and 5 MHz, while the driving voltage was chosen as 4 Vpp, as 
shown in Fig. 3 f-h. The optical signal was effectively modulated across different frequencies, 
showcasing the device's versatility for high-speed switching with minimal electro-optic relaxation 
effects, which is a crucial issue for low-frequency or long-timescale applications, like ubiquitous DC 
bias in modulators42. As shown in Fig. 3i, the switching exhibited a fast rising/falling time of around 2.5 
ns, primarily limited by the measurement setup in the lab. Intrinsically, the switching speed can be 
achieved in sub-nanosecond scale. 
Fig. 3j demonstrates the measured static spectral responses at the through port of this FP cavity when 
operated with different driving voltages Vdr of −10, 0, and +10 V, respectively. The EO modulation 
efficiencies for negative and positive biases were different with the measured values of 30 pm/V and 20 
pm/V, respectively, showing the asymmetry similar to the MRR-based PZT optical memristors 
mentioned above. By judiciously choosing the appropriate ferroelectric domain polarization and bias 
voltage, the effective Pockels coefficient can be enhanced, which is advantageous for developing high-
performance EO modulators as desired for high-speed optical processing systems.  

  
Fig. 3 |The present FP-cavity-based PZT optical memristor. a. Schematic configuration. MWGs, multimode 
waveguide gratings, Modemux, mode multiplexers. b. Optical microscopy image of the fabricated device. c. Measured 
transmission spectral responses at the through port with different setting voltages Vset. d. 64-level setting process 
(detuning with 1559.2 nm) induced by applying different setting voltages Vset. e. Five distinct non-volatile states, 
corresponding to the setting voltages Vset of 30, 21, 23, 25, and 36 V. For each non-volatile state, there are 20 cycles 
measured for the resonance-wavelength detuning. Real-time optical modulation measurements: f-h: Normalized output 
optical intensity at the through port when operating with rectangular driving-voltage signals (Vdr=4Vpp) at the frequency 
of 1 Hz (f), 100 kHz (g) and 5 MHz (h). i. The rising/falling edge of the switched optical signals. j. Measured spectral 
responses at the through port of the FP cavity when operating with different driving voltages Vdr of −10, 0, and +10 V, 
respectively. 
 

Multifunctional Photonic Circuits Enabled by Scalable PZT Optical Memristors 
Previously reported optical memristors were still limited to the implementations of individual elements 
(such as MZIs and MRRs) 12,22, and have not demonstrated their potential scalability for multifunctional 
photonic systems on a chip with large-scale integration, which is essential for practical applications. 
Here, we make the efforts to demonstrate the scalability and versatility of our PZT optical memristors 
with the following two representative architectures, including a memristive optical switch matrix and an 
adaptive memristive multi-channel optical cavities for spectral manipulation. 
Memristive Optical Switch Matrix. 
The memristive optical switch matrix demonstrated here is a 4×4 non-blocking optical switch with Benes 
topology, as shown in Fig. 4a, integrating six 2×2 MZI-based PZT optical memristors cascaded in three 
stages and two waveguide crossings (Supplementary section 12). Initially, these six 2×2 MZIs showed 
notable random phase errors due to the random variation of the waveguide dimensions, which is a 
common challenge in developing large-scale PICs43. Fig. 4b shows the measured transmissions Tij (i, 
j=1, 2, 3, 4) from port Ii to port Oj at the initial state without any calibration, illustrating that light from 
any one input port was routed to the target and non-target output ports with randomly power ratios 
(Supplementary section 13). In this case, careful calibration is often inevitable for conventional MZIs, 
which introduces high complexity for the development and also consumes additional power to 
compensate the random phase errors43. Fortunately, the initial random phase errors can be compensated 
conveniently by utilizing the PZT non-volatility to introduce permanent phase-correction for each 2×2 
MZI. By applying the appropriate setting voltage, we achieved phase shifts ranging from 0 to π, 
effectively reconfiguring each MZI to the desired ON or OFF state. Several typical routing 
configurations were demonstrated successfully by applying optimal setting voltages Vset, as summarized 
in Fig. 4c-e and Table S2 in the Supplemental materials. For example, we configured the routes non-
volatilely as follows: (1) Configuration #1 with the routines of I1→O1, I2→O2, I3→O3 and I4→O4; (2) 
Configuration #2 with the routines of I1→O3, I2→O4, I3→O1, and I4→O2; (3) Configuration #3 with the 
routines of I1→O2, I2→O1, I3→O3, and I4→O4. All these non-volatile reconfigurations of optical routines 
were realized with decent extinction ratios higher than 15 dB within the wavelength range of 1530-1600 
nm. In particular, for a single MZI, one can achieve non-volatile optical power routing with a low excess 
loss less than 0.3 dB and high extinction ratios greater than 30 dB at the center wavelength 
(Supplementary section 14). In theory, the performance could be further enhanced with fine phase 
control. This memristive optical switch matrix was further used to demonstrate high-bit-rate data routing 
by choosing configuration #3 as an example (Supplementary section 14), and 40 Gbps non-return-to-
zero (NRZ) data were launched into the corresponding input port. Fig. 4f shows the measured eye-
diagrams for the data routing in the configuration #3, exhibiting high signal-to-noise ratios, showing 
great potential for developing large-scale N×N optical switch matrix with excellent non-volatile 
reconfiguration and high-speed operation. The ability to compensate the initial random phase errors non-
volatilely eliminates the need for continuous power consumption for correction, representing a great 
advancement for developing programmable photonic chips. 

    
 
Fig. 4 | Examples of multifunctional photonic circuits enabled by scalable PZT optical memristors: a, Optical 
microscopy image of the 4×4 optical switch. b. Chart of the measured transmissions from the input ports (I1, I2, I3, and 
I4) to the output ports (O1, O2, O3, and O4) at the initial state with random phase errors. c-e Chart of the measured 
transmissions from the input ports (I1, I2, I3, and I4) to the output ports (O1, O2, O3, and O4) when all the 2×2 MZI 
switches are reconfigured with the desired optical routines (as defined by configurations #1, #2 and #3) by applying 
the appropriate setting voltages. f. Measured eye diagrams for the optical signals propagating along the routines (I1-O2, 
I2-O1, I3-O3, I4-O4) as defined by configuration #3. FP-cavity-based PZT optical memristors in cascade for adaptive 
memristive spectral manipulation: g. Schematic configuration; h. Optical microscopy image of the fabricated device; i. 
Measured transmission spectra at the through ports for the initial state without any correction; j. Measured transmission 
spectra at the through/cross ports when the resonance wavelength of each FP cavity was aligned carefully to have 
uniform channel spacing by applying the corresponding setting voltage Vset; k. Measured transmission spectra at the 
through/cross ports when channels #1 and #3 are erased and retrospectively reset so that their resonance wavelengths 
are respectively aligned with channels #2 and #4.  

Adaptive Memristive Optical Cavities for Spectral Manipulation.  
Optical cavities have been developed very popularly and used very widely, while the resonance 
wavelengths have to be tuned for alignment with additional power consumption 41. Here, we developed 
an adaptive approach of non-volatilely fine-tuning the resonance wavelengths of multiple FP cavities in 
cascade for PZT optical memristors (Fig. 4g-h). Fig. 4i gives the measured initial transmission at the 
through port, showing high non-uniformity of the channel spacing, which seriously hinders the 
application in systems. When channels #1- #4 were tuned by applying the appropriate setting voltages 
Vset of 15, 30, 12, and 13V, the resonance wavelengths were well aligned with a uniform channel spacing 
of 200 GHz (1.6 nm), as shown in, as shown in Fig. 4j. Note that the Q-factor changes of these FP 
cavities were negligible, further validating that no additional loss was introduced. To further verify the 
non-volatile spectral manipulation, the setting states of channels #1 and #3 were erased and reset with 8 
V and 15 V, in which way their resonance wavelengths were aligned with channels #2 and #4, 
respectively, as shown in Fig. 4k. Accordingly, the present four-channel FP-cavity-based PZT optical 
memristors were reconfigured successfully to have a two-channel spectral response with a channel 
spacing of 400 GHz and enhanced extinction ratios of >25 dB. The chip was also characterized after it 
was stored at room temperature for three weeks, exhibiting a gentle resonance-wavelength shift less than 
0.01 nm, thus verifying a high long-term stability (Supplementary section 15). which is crucial for 
practical applications. The demonstrated non-volatility addresses the key issues for optical cavities used 
for the applications like wavelength-selective switches (WSSs), which are crucial components in flexible 
optical networks 44. In addition, the present structure could also work as a modulator array available to 
work together with an optical frequency comb or multi-wavelength lasers for ultra-high capacity optical 
interconnects 41 or optical computing 45,46with multiple wavelength-channels. 
These demonstrations in Fig. 4 showcase the great potential of PZT optical memristors for developing 
large-scale photonic chips used in many applications, paving a way for future memristor-based photonic 
computing and communication platforms.  
Vision of potential applications of optical PZT memristors  
Our vision of potential applications of the developed optical PZT memristors is illustrated in Fig. 5, 
which highlights the diverse application prospects of the thin-film PZT platform for PICs, showcasing 
great potential in optical interconnects, microwave photonics, optical neural networks, and Lidar, etc. 
As shown in Fig. 5, a general architecture of compact optical transmitters/receivers with multiple FP-
cavity modulators or filters in cascade is presented, as desired for high-capacity wavelength-division-
multiplexed optical interconnects. For this optical transmitter, the volatility of these cascaded FP-cavity 
modulators supports high-speed EO modulation, while their electrical non-volatility is used for precise 
trimming to align the central wavelengths as defined. For this receiver, the non-volatility is utilized for 
achieving accurate wavelength alignment for the multi-channel FP-cavity filter. With this configuration, 
ultra-compact, high-speed, energy-efficient, and high-data-capacity optical interconnect systems can be 
realized with an optical frequency comb laser source. 
Compared with other non-volatile solutions, the present thin-film PZT platform supports low-loss 
waveguide propagation as well as high-speed EO modulation, enabling various large-scale 
reconfigurable PICs. For example, the integration of multiple high-speed EO MZI switches and low-loss 
waveguide spirals can achieve high-speed tunable optical delaylines and the array, facilitating the 
realization of high-speed parallel signal processors that can manipulate signals across temporal, 
wavelength, and spatial dimensions. The chip can be reconfigured conveniently to support a range of 
advanced functionalities, including accurate microwave reception, narrowband microwave filtering, and 
wide-bandwidth arbitrary waveform generation for optical computing. The inherent non-volatility of 
PZT optical waveguides allows for precise trimming of random phase errors in MZI switches, greatly 
simplifying the control systems and significantly reducing the energy consumption for the PICs when 
used for handling complex and diverse signal processing tasks. 
We also present a general optical neural network (ONN) architecture, which can be implemented 
efficiently using the present PZT optical memristors equipped with MZIs or MRRs, without any 

additional complexity of design and presents significant challenges, as depicted in Fig. 5. In this example, 
this architecture is designed with MZIs, while a mesh of MRRs can also be developed similarly. With 
this ONN, high-speed training is facilitated through the volatility of the thin-film PZT MZI when the 
driving voltage Vdr is below the threshold voltage Vth. After the network is trained very well, non-volatile 
setting can be achieved by appropriately adjusting one arm of the MZI-based optical memristors, 
depending on the setting voltage Vset. In contrast, the use of non-volatile PCMs for being reconfigured 
with optical pulses presents challenges for large-scale PICs, due to the inability to support high-speed 
training, the complexity of the control systems, and unavailability of ultra-low energy consumption. 
The last but not the least, with the high-speed EO modulation capability of the present PZT optical 
memristors when working below Vth, an optical phased array (OPA) with frequency-modulated 
continuous-wave (FMCW) technology is achievable for all-solid-state light detection and ranging 
(LiDAR). When compared with the popular thermo-optically modulated silicon OPAs, the present PZT 
optical memristors have significant advantages of consuming ultra-low energy, eliminating the thermal 
crosstalk and enabling ultra-fast modulation speeds, which is especially crucial within dense OPAs for 
high-resolution LiDAR systems47. On the other hand, the PZT optical memristors offer high modulation 
efficiency with low temperature sensitivity as well as low DC drift, which is evidently more 
advantageous than conventional EO modulation used for OPAs. This is exactly essential for real-time 
data processing and rapid environmental mapping in autonomous vehicles and other applications 
requiring precise spatial-awareness and object-detection.  
 
Fig. 5 |Pat of the potential applications in the Future   
 
 

Conclusions and Discussion 
This work reported a brand-new integrated optical memristors based on thin-film PZT. We have revealed 
the approach of directly controlling the refractive index with electrical non-volatility by harnessing 
multi-level mixed-polarization domain states in thin-film PZT. Our presented PZT optical memristors 
offer unprecedented advantages with exceptional performance metrics like low losses, low switching 
energy, high modulation depth, high stability, quasi-continuous reconfigurability, which have not been 
achieved simultaneously for other existed optical memristor technologies (see the comparison with 
details in Supplementary Table S1). In addition, the performance of the present PZT optical memristors 
can even be improved further by optimizing the fabrication and setting/poling process. According to 
observations in Ref. 48, which shows that the poling time in thin-film PZT depends on the pulse duration 
and waveforms, the speeds for both Set and Reset operations of the present PZT optical memristors 
could be improved by shortening voltage pulses. 
Notably, the present PZT optical memristors have unique functional duality with multi-level non-volatile 
settings and high-speed volatile switching, as summarized in Supplementary Section 16. This marks a 
significant advancement by uniquely merging non-volatile and volatile technologies in a single platform, 
a capability not yet reported elsewhere. Very excitingly, the functional duality opens new paradigms in 
high-speed and energy-efficient photonic computing, where the weight array could be retrained 
volatilely with a fast speed in GHz-scale and stored non-volatilely with high precision. We also highlight 
the scalability of PZT optical memristors for developing PICs with a number of elements, featuring a 
memristive optical switch matrix and an adaptive memristive cavity. The wafer-scale sol-gel fabrication 
process ensures CMOS compatibility and scalability, while maintaining low propagation losses, making 
it ideal for large-scale on-chip photonic integration.   
These unparalleled capabilities of PZT optical memristors are extremely exciting with significantly 
reduced energy consumption and greatly enhanced processing speed, and show great potential for 
overcoming the von Neumann bottleneck, positioning PZT optical memristor as a transformative 
strategy for new paradigms in integrated photonics. Looking forward, we anticipate further integration 
of functionalities, like high-speed and energy-efficient optical interconnects, microwave photonics, 
optical phased array Lidar, quantum computing, optical neural networks, in-memory computing and 
brain-like architectures.  
 
References 
1 
Strukov, D. B., Snider, G. S., Stewart, D. R. & Williams, R. S. The missing memristor found. 
nature 453, 80-83 (2008). 
2 
Youngblood, N., Ríos Ocampo, C. A., Pernice, W. H. P. & Bhaskaran, H. Integrated optical 
memristors. Nat. Photonics 17, 561-572 (2023). 
3 
Ríos, C. et al. In-memory computing on a photonic platform. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau5759 (2019). 
4 
Feldmann, J., Youngblood, N., Wright, C. D., Bhaskaran, H. & Pernice, W. H. All-optical spiking 
neurosynaptic networks with self-learning capabilities. Nature 569, 208-214 (2019). 
5 
Feldmann, J. et al. Parallel convolutional processing using an integrated photonic tensor core. 
Nature 589, 52-58 (2021). 
6 
Lian, C. et al. Photonic (computational) memories: tunable nanophotonics for data storage and 
computing. Nanophotonics 11, 3823-3854 (2022). 
7 
Shastri, B. J. et al. Photonics for artificial intelligence and neuromorphic computing. Nat. 
Photonics 15, 102-114 (2021). 
8 
Zhang, Y. et al. Electrically reconfigurable non-volatile metasurface using low-loss optical 
phase-change material. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 661-666 (2021). 
9 
Wuttig, M., Bhaskaran, H. & Taubner, T. Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic 
applications. Nat. Photonics 11, 465-476 (2017). 
10 
Fang, Z. et al. Arbitrary Programming of Racetrack Resonators Using Low-Loss Phase-Change 
Material Sb2Se3. Nano Lett. 24, 97-103 (2023). 
11 
Fang, Z. et al. Ultra-low-energy programmable non-volatile silicon photonics based on phase-

change materials with graphene heaters. Nat. Nanotechnol. 17, 842-848 (2022). 
12 
Chen, R. et al. Non-volatile electrically programmable integrated photonics with a 5-bit 
operation. Nat. Commun. 14, 3465 (2023). 
13 
Ríos, C. et al. Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multi-level memory. Nat. Photonics 9, 725-
732 (2015). 
14 
Wei, M. et al. Monolithic back-end-of-line integration of phase change materials into foundry-
manufactured silicon photonics. Nat. Commun. 15, 2786 (2024). 
15 
Zhang, H. et al. Miniature multilevel optical memristive switch using phase change material. 
ACS Photonics 6, 2205-2212 (2019). 
16 
Zheng, J. et al. Nonvolatile electrically reconfigurable integrated photonic switch enabled by a 
silicon PIN diode heater. Adv. Mater. 32, 2001218 (2020). 
17 
Kim, D. U. et al. Programmable photonic arrays based on microelectromechanical elements with 
femtowatt-level standby power consumption. Nat. Photonics 17, 1089-1096 (2023). 
18 
Edinger, P. et al. in 2022 IEEE 35th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical 
Systems Conference (MEMS)    995-997 (IEEE, 2022). 
19 
Cheung, S. et al. Energy efficient photonic memory based on electrically programmable 
embedded III-V/Si memristors: switches and filters. Commun. Eng. 3 (2024). 
20 
Tossoun, B. et al. High-speed and energy-efficient non-volatile silicon photonic memory based 
on heterogeneously integrated memresonator. Nat Commun 15, 551 (2024). 
21 
Guo, R. et al. Non-volatile memory based on the ferroelectric photovoltaic effect. Nat. Commun. 
4, 1990 (2013). 
22 
Geler-Kremer, J. et al. A ferroelectric multilevel non-volatile photonic phase shifter. Nat. 
Photonics 16, 491-497 (2022). 
23 
Xie, Y. et al. Towards large-scale programmable silicon photonic chip for signal processing. 
Nanophotonics 13, 2051-2073 (2024). 
24 
Mao, J. et al. Ultra-fast perovskite electro-optic modulator and multi-band transmission up to 
300 Gbit s−1. Commun. Mater. 5, 114 (2024). 
25 
Delaney, M. et al. Nonvolatile programmable silicon photonics using an ultralow-loss Sb2Se3 
phase change materia. Sci. Adv. 7, 3500 (2021). 
26 
Lvovsky, A. I., Sanders, B. C. & Tittel, W. Optical quantum memory. Nat. Photonics 3, 706-714 
(2009). 
27 
Zheng, Y. et al. Multichip multidimensional quantum networks with entanglement retrievability. 
Science 381, 221-226 (2023). 
28 
Xu, Z. et al. Large-scale photonic chiplet Taichi empowers 160-TOPS/W artificial general 
intelligence. Science 384, 6692 (2024). 
29 
Zhang, W. et al. Edge learning using a fully integrated neuro-inspired memristor chip. Science 
381, 1205-1211 (2023). 
30 
Monga, S. et al. Prospects of non-linear optical behaviour of PZT/ZnO heterostructures. Ceram. 
Int. 49, 11737-11752 (2023). 
31 
Morioka, H., Asano, G., Oikawa, T., Funakubo, H. & Saito, K. Large remanent polarization of 
100% polar-axis-oriented epitaxial tetragonal Pb (Zr 0.35 Ti 0.65) O 3 thin films. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 82, 4761-4763 (2003). 
32 
Glinchuk, M. et al. Optical refraction index and polarization profile of ferroelectric thin films. 
Integr. Ferroelectr. 38, 101-110 (2001). 
33 
Salvestrini, J. P., Guilbert, L., Fontana, M., Abarkan, M. & Gille, S. Analysis and Control of the 
DC Drift in LiNbO3Based Mach–Zehnder Modulators. J. Lightwave Technol. 29, 1522-1534 
(2011). 
34 
Shen, Y. et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nat. Photonics 11, 441-446 
(2017). 
35 
Lu, K. et al. Empowering high-dimensional optical fiber communications with integrated 
photonic processors. Nat. Commun. 15, 3515 (2024). 

36 
Chen, X., Lin, J. & Wang, K. A Review of Silicon‐Based Integrated Optical Switches. Laser 
Photonics Rev. 17, 2200571 (2023). 
37 
Wang, C. et al. Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at CMOS-
compatible voltages. Nature 562, 101-104 (2018). 
38 
Li, X., Gao, W., Lu, L., Chen, J. & Zhou, L. Ultra-low-loss multi-layer 8 × 8 microring optical 
switch. Photonics Res. 11, 712-723 (2023). 
39 
Zhang, C. et al. Reconfigurable multichannel amplitude equalizer based on cascaded silicon 
photonic microrings. Photonics Res. 11, 742-749 (2023). 
40 
Eppenberger, M. et al. Resonant plasmonic micro-racetrack modulators with high bandwidth and 
high temperature tolerance. Nat. Photonics 17, 360-367 (2023). 
41 
Rizzo, A. et al. Massively scalable Kerr comb-driven silicon photonic link. Nat. Photonics 17, 
781-790 (2023). 
42 
Holzgrafe, J. et al. Relaxation of the electro-optic response in thin-film lithium niobate 
modulators. Opt. Express 32, 3619-3631 (2024). 
43 
Song, L. et al. Low-loss calibration-free 2× 2 Mach-Zehnder switches with varied-width 
multimode-interference couplers. J. Lightwave Technol. 40, 5254-5259 (2022). 
44 
Khope, A. S. P. et al. Multi-wavelength selective crossbar switch. Opt. Express 27, 5203-5216 
(2019). 
45 
Bai, B. et al. Microcomb-based integrated photonic processing unit. Nat Commun 14, 66 (2023). 
46 
Xu, S., Wang, J., Yi, S. & Zou, W. High-order tensor flow processing using integrated photonic 
circuits. Nat Commun 13, 7970 (2022). 
47 
Wang, W. et al. Cascaded subarray design and control method for power efficient, thermal 
crosstalk optimized optical phased array. Opt. Express 31, 37381-37394 (2023). 
48 
Kobayashi, T., Suzuki, Y., Makimoto, N., Funakubo, H. & Maeda, R. Influence of pulse poling 
on the piezoelectric property of Pb (Zr0. 52, Ti0. 48) O3 thin films. AIP Adv. 4 (2014). 
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U23B2047, 
62321166651, 62305294, and 92150302), Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province 
(LD19F050001), Zhejiang Provincial Major Research and Development Program (2022C01103), 
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China Postdoctoral Science Foundation 
(2023M733039), and Leading Innovative and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program of Zhejiang 
(2021R01001), “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang Province (2024C01112). 
Author contribution. D.D. and C.L. conceived the idea, C.L. developed the theory of PZT optical non-
volatility, C.L., T.S. and D.D. designed the PZT memristors and the chip layout, T.S., C.L., H.Y. and 
C.W. fabricated the chip, Y.Z and C.L. carried out the high-speed optical signal-processing of the 
memristors, H.C. and J.X. built up the system experiments for measuring eye-diagrams, H.Y., H.L., Z.X., 
Z.Y. contributed to the discussion of the fabrication and poling process, C.L. and D.D. wrote the 
manuscript, all authors discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript. D.D. and F.Q. supervised 
the project. 
 
Competing interests: 
The authors declare no competing interests.  
 
Data availability.  
Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time but may be 
obtained from the authors upon reasonable request. 
 
 

Methods 
Fabrication of PZT optical memristors. For the fabrication of the present PZT optical memristors, as 
shown in Fig. S1, the surface of SiO2/Si was chemically modified with an atomic seed layer firstly, 
which promotes the crystallization of PZT in the desired atomic lattice orientation. After the PZT thin-
film was formed by the spin-coating technique, the substrate was heated in a rapid thermal annealing 
system at elevated temperatures under O2 atmosphere. The spin-coating and rapid thermal annealing 
process were repeated several times to obtain the target film thickness of 300 nm. The details of the PZT 
deposition can refer to Juhe EO Tech. Co., Ltd. (www.eomaterials.com).The waveguide structure was 
patterned using the electron-beam lithography (EBL) or ultraviolet stepper lithography, and then was 
etched to a depth of 200 nm using the inductively coupled plasma process. Subsequently, a metal 
electrode pattern was created using the ultraviolet contact lithography, and the metal electrode consisting 
of 5-nm-thick Ti and 400-nm-thick Au layers was formed using the electron-beam evaporation and lift-
off processes. Finally, a 1.8-μm-thick SiO2 film was spin-coated on top as the upper-cladding. 
 
 
Fig. S1 Fabrication process of PZT Optical Memristors. Surface Preparation: the SiO2/Si substrate was chemically modified 
with an atomic seed layer; PZT Deposition: PZT film was deposited by spin-coating, followed by rapid thermal annealing; a 
300 nm thickness PZT film was achieved; Waveguide Patterning: the waveguide structure was patterned using electron-beam 
lithography (or ultraviolet stepper lithography) and etched to a 200 nm depth; Electrode Formation: metal electrodes (5-nm-
thick Ti and 400-nm-thick Au) were patterned; Upper Cladding: a 1.8-μm-thick SiO2 film was spin-coated. 
 
PZT waveguide characterization. Fig. S2a shows the schematic diagram of the waveguide cross-
section and the poling process. In this work, the thin-film PZT was poled conveniently at room 
temperature by applying an external electric field Epol of ~20 V/μm for ~30 minutes. The state of the 
ferroelectric domain in PZT after poling is defined as the “initial” state in this paper. The PZT optical 
memristors were developed on a 4-inch PZT-on-insulator wafer featuring a 300-nm-thick thin-film PZT. 
The PZT ridge waveguides were designed with 200-nm etching depth, while the refractive index of PZT 
and SiO2 are given as nPZT=2.40 and nSiO2=1.44 at the wavelength-band of 1550 nm, respectively. The 
simulated field distribution for the TE0 mode of the PZT optical waveguide is shown Fig. S2b, where 
the optical field is tightly confined in the PZT ridge with a high confinement factor over 85% due to the 
high refractive-index contrast, which facilitates strong electro-optic interaction in PZT. 

 
Fig. S2 PZT waveguide characterization. a. Schematic diagram of the waveguide cross-section and the poling process. b. 
Simulated field profile of the TE0 mode. 
 
Experimental setup for spectral responses measurement 
 
Fig. S3 Schematic of the experimental setup for spectral responses measurement with external electrical voltage. ASE: 
amplified spontaneous emission; DUT: device under test.  
 
The transmission spectral responses were measured with the setup consisting of an amplified 
spontaneous emission (ASE) source and an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) whose resolution was set 
at 0.02 nm, as shown Fig. S3. The results were normalized with the transmission of a straight waveguide 
fabricated on the same chip near the devices. A sourcemeter (Keithley 2410) was used to apply the 
external electrical field for poling or setting the PZT optical memristors and measure the current 
simultaneously.  
 
Experimental setup for eye diagram measurement 
 
Fig. S4 Setup used for the eye diagram measurement. AWG: arbitrary waveform generator. EDFA: erbium-doped fiber 
amplifier. EA: electrical RF amplifier 
 
Light was polarization-controlled and coupled to the fabricated PZT chip, and the modulator was driven 
by the RF signals generated by the arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) amplified by a linear electrical 
RF amplifier (EA), while a bias-Tee was used so that the modulator operates at the quadrature point with 
a given DC bias. The output optical signal was amplified using an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) 
It was then detected by a 45-GHz photodetector and connected to the oscilloscope. 

Experimental setup for high-speed optical signal-processing 
 
Fig. S5 Schematic of the experimental setup for high-speed optical signal-processing. AFG: arbitrary function generator, 
device under test (DUT). 
 
Fig. S5 shows the high-speed optical signal-processing: a tunable laser was used as the light source and 
was coupled into the PZT optical memristors through a grating coupler. Here a polarization controller 
(PC) was used to achieve TE-polarized light for the input. A continuous rectangular-wave signal with 
different modulated frequency generated from an arbitrary function generator (AFG) was then applied 
to the DUT. The modulated optical signals were coupled from the chip to the fiber connected with a10%: 
90% power splitter and the port with 90% output-power was connected to the oscilloscope (DSO) via a 
photodetector (PD), while the other 10% output-power was collected by an optical spectrum analyzer, 
which allowed synchronized observation of the operating wavelength. A Keithley 2410 sourcemeter was 
employed to apply the external electric field for setting/resetting the PZT optical memristors and to 
measure the leakage current simultaneously. 
 
Experimental setup for High-bit-rate data routing  
Fig. S6 shows the measurement setup for high-bit-rate data routing with the developed memristive 
optical switch matrix. Here the tunable laser was set at 1550nm with an output power of 13 dBm injected 
into a LiNbO3 Mach-Zehnder modulator. The high-speed OOK signals with a standard pseudo-random 
binary sequence (PRBS) pattern were generated by an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) and then 
amplified by the commercial RF amplifier (SHF S807C), and finally were injected to drive the optical 
modulator. The modulated optical signals were then sent to the memristive optical switch matrix. At the 
receiving end, the optical signals were amplified by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA,) and 
subsequently analyzed with a sampling oscilloscope.  
 
Fig. S6. Experimental setup for high-bit-rate data routing: AWG: arbitrary waveform generator. EDFA: erbium-doped fiber 
amplifier 
 

